Nightside of Eden 



SKOOB BOOKS PUBLISHING 
LONDON 




First published in Great Britain 1977 by Frederick Muller Ltd. 

COPYRIGHT © Skoob Books Publishing 1994 
Copyright © Kenneth Grant 1977, 1994 

New edition by: 

SKOOB BOOKS PUBLISHING 
Skoob Esoterica Series 
1 la-17 Sicilian Avenue 
Southampton Row 
London WC1A2QH 

Series editor: Christopher Johnson 

All rights reserved 

ISBN 1 871438 72 1 Hardback 

Reprinted by Hillman Printers (Frome) Ltd. 


i 


i 


( 


i 


ERRATA 


This volume is reprinted from the 1977 first edition in which there 
were a number of errors. These have been corrected where possible, 
otherwise they are marked with an asterisk and listed on page 290. 


Contents 


Author’s Foreword xi 

Part One : Trees of Eternity 

Introduction 1 

1 The Place of the Cross 5 

2 Qabalah of the Primal Gnosis 12 

3 The Light that is Not 23 

4 The Door of Death 34 

5 Beyond the Pylon of the Pit 39 

6 Typhonian Teratomas 51 

7 Idols of Merodach 65 

8 The Divine Ape 77 

9 The Negative Way 93 

10 Adumbrations of Maat 106 

11 The Vulture’s Mouth 119 

12 Typhonian Totems of the Tantras 131 

Part Two\ The Tunnels of Set 

Introduction 142 

1 Amprodias 154 

2 Baratchial 162 

3 Gargophias 166 

4 Dagdagiel 176 


Nightside of Eden 


vi 


5 Hemethterith 

183 

6 Uriens 

186 

7 Zamradiel 

190 

8 Characith 

198 

9 Temphioth 

202 

10 Yamatu 

207 

11 Kurgasiax 

211 

12 Lafcursiax 

213 

13 Malkunofat 

216 

14 Niantiel 

219 

15 Saksaksalim 

226 

16 A’ano’nin 

228 

17 Parfaxitas 

233 

18 Tzuflifu 

237 

19 Qulielfi 

239 

20 Raflifu 

245 

21 Shalicu 

248 

22 Thantifaxath 

253 

Glossary 

256 

Bibliography 

286 

Index 

291 


Illustrations 


PLATE 

1 The Fall by Austin Osman Spare frontispiece 

Between page 112 and 113 

2 The Demon Feast by Margaret Cook 

3 The Pylon of the Pit by Steffi Grant (Soror 

Hyarun) 

4 The Black Goddess of Space by Michael Bertiaux 

(photo by Nina Miller) 

5 Dwellers Beyond Daath both drawings by Janice 

Ayers (Soror Tanith) 

6 Moon of Hecate by David L. Smith 

7 Vinum Sabbati by Steffi Grant 

8 The Vulture on the Tower of Silence by Allen 

Holub 

9 Grimoire of the Dark Doctrine by Steffi Grant 

(Soror Ilyarun) 

10 The Ophidian Mind by Austin Osman Spare 

11 The Crocodile ofKhem by Allen Holub 

12 Black Kundalini: Two Transyuggothian Gods of 

Magic by Michael Bertiaux (photo by Nina 
Miller) 

13 The Tunnel of Temphioth by Jan Bailey (Soror 

Tamarinth) 

14 Lava of Malkunofat by Frederick Seaton 


Nightside of Eden 


15 Trapeze Tragedy by Austin Osman Spare 

16 The Goddess of the Future by Michael Bertiaux 

(photo by Nina Miller) 

17 Creative Vortex by Steffi Grant (Soror Hyarun) 

18 The Work of the Wand & the Work of the Sword 

by Allen Holub 



. . . for Babalon above 
and Babalon below ... 



‘My incense is of resinous woods & gums; and there is no 
blood therein: because of my hair the trees of Eternity’. 

The Goddess Nuit (AL. I. 59.) 


Author’s Foreword 


THE OPINION seems to be held in certain quarters that I 
have in my previous books revealed a little too much of the 
Mysteries, and that the Veil of Isis has been lifted to an 
almost unseemly height. I therefore reiterate the fact that the 
Mysteries, the true Gnosis, are of a predominantly psycho- 
sexual nature. I have merely made available — perhaps for 
the first time in so plain a manner — knowledge which has 
hitherto been occult, i.e. hidden. In accordance with this fact 
I make no apology for having made these Mysteries clear to 
those who possess the necessary insight. 

That there are dark Mysteries here is undeniable, but also 
there are the keys to their understanding. Perhaps this may 
be claimed for the present book even more than for the 
trilogy that preceded it, where certain operative formulae 
were withheld. 

The keys of practical occultism, whether of Mysticism or 
of Magick, may be apprehended intellectually by the study of 
books, but it is on the inner planes alone that their effective 
workings may be revealed. Unless the requisite contacts on 
the inner planes are established in the proper manner, no 
amount of reading will disclose ‘secrets’ that are literally 
indecipherable and therefore truly occult. The safeguards are 
both automatic and fool-proof. 

In view of the foregoing it may well be asked why one 



Foreword 


xii Nightside of Eden 

should go to the trouble of expounding Mysteries on one 
level when. their full comprehension is possible only on 
another that is not generally available. The answer is that 
there exists a large body of individuals — a body which is 
growing more rapidly than at any other time in human history 
— that needs a pointer, a mere hint, to increase its sensitivity 
to inner plane influences. 

It is the task of an Initiate who represents a particular 
magical Order, to develop the work of his predecessor. In the 
present instance that Order is the O.T.O. {Ordo Templi 
Orientis), and the task requires the exposition of the magical 
current known as 93, or Thelema, which Aleister Crowley 
received from an extra-terrestrial source and which he 
embodied in The Book of the Law, and other writings. 1 

The present work therefore, which is based upon an 
extremely sinister grimoire known as Liber 231 1 , continues 
to transmit the 93 Current as revived by Crowley in the 
twentieth century. 

It is inevitable that during the process of a current’s 
evolution, certain aspects found to be obsolete, impractical, 
or erroneous, have to be rejected in favour of more efficient 
means. This applies with particular cogency in the sphere of 
magical initiation as evolved in Orders such as the O.T.O., 
about which it is here necessary to say a few words. 

The system of initiation employed by the O.T.O., of which 
Crowley was the Head in his day, was based upon a masonic 
structure. Crowley did not alter that structure although he 
revised the rituals of the lower degrees of the Order after he 
had been charged with infringing the rights of orthodox 
freemasonry. 

*See Bibliography, under Crowley, Aleister. 

1 First published in The Equinox, vol. L No. vii, London, 1912. The number 
231 is the sum of the numbers of the Tarot Cards, 0-21; it is, therefore, the 
extension of the number 22. Liber 231 (or CCXXXI as it is more usually desig¬ 
nated) treats of the 22 Atus of Thoth as applied to the 22 Paths of the Tree of 
Life, and the 22 cells of the Qliphoth. Crowley has treated openly of the Atus 
(see The Book of Thoth), but of the 22 Cells of the Qliphoth and the Tunnels of 
Set beneath the Paths, he did not write. The present book therefore completes 
the work he left unfinished. 


xiii 

Since those days (c.1915), the entire system of Lodge and 
Ritual Working has been abandoned. It was manifestly 
unwieldy and — owing to its ever widening international 
scope — it became impracticable for members to meet at one 
time and at one place for purposes of magical working. But 
above all, the masonic structure no longer accords with New 
Aeon consciousness and attitudes. In other words, the 
masonic formula is ‘out of the true’ and no longer represents 
the Universal Design of mystical and magical attainment. 

The Old Aeon systems of masonry were based upon the 
Square, and founded upon a concept of male supremacy 
symbolized by Osiris, Solomon, and other patriarchal figures. 
The new O.T.O. is founded upon the Circle, the Goddess, 
the Mother whose child is her symbol. It is thus a seeming 
revival of an earlier (in fact the earliest) ethos, in that it 
involves the worship of the Primal Goddess who, knowing no 
god, was later cast out as ‘godless’, and therefore — by a 
mode of the same curious logic — ‘devilish’. 3 Psychic evolu¬ 
tion, like other forms of evolution, unfolds in a spiral fashion, 
and the apparent revival of the Cult of the Mother and her 
Son is, on closer inspection, seen to have progressed, for the 
‘child’ is no longer the son but the daughter. This advance in 
types is too abstruse for discussion here; it has been explained 
in my trilogy, developed in the present book, and mentioned 
here in order to refute certain criticisms of the new O.T.O. 
that have been levelled against it by those who fail to under¬ 
stand the spirally progressive evolution and reincarnation of 
magical formulae. 

The O.T.O. retains its eleven degrees, which are now 
regarded as lesser circles upon the rim of that greater Circle 
or Wheel which is in process of continual revolution. All the 
degrees — equidistant from the immobile hub — are therefore 
equivalent. They rise and fall rhythmically, always approach¬ 
ing or receding from one of the two horizons, the place of 

3 There was at that primitive stage of society no knowledge of the father on 
earth, and, therefore, no father or ‘god’ image in heaven, for the ‘gods’ are but 
psychic projections. 






xiv Nightside of Eden 

rising and the place of setting, the place of birth (manifes¬ 
tation) and the place of death (non-manifestation). 

Death was the great illusion of the previous Aeon — the 
Aeon of Osiris. Now, however in this Aeon of Horns, which is 
the Aeon of the Eternal Child, life and death are seen as con¬ 
tinuous phenomena, or as Day and Night in the process of 
Self-enlightenment. 

The doctrine has been explained in detail in my Typhonian 
Trilogy. The seeds of it existed in Crowley’s inspired writings, 
but he personally seemed unable to conceive a system of 
initiation outside the framework postulated by freemasonry. 
This is why he perpetuated the old and rigid system described 
in The Equinox, vol. HI, No. 1., which was upheld after his 
death by his unquestioning disciple, Karl J. Germer. It was 
therefore left to the present writer to carry the new scheme 
forward, and this he has been doing for the past 25 years. 

The foregoing remarks have been prompted by the many 
letters concerning the 93 Current and the O.T.O. received 
after the publication of my previous books. It is hoped that 
the function of the newly organized Order will now finally 
have been clarified. 

Special thanks and acknowledgements are due to Mr. 
Michael Bertiaux, Head of the Black Snake Cult, for material 
to which I have referred in the introduction to Part I, and 
elsewhere; to Mr. Gary Straw and Ms. Margaret Cook, and the 
editors of The Cincinnati Journal of Ceremonial Magick, for 
permission to quote from Liber Pennae Praenumbra , and 
material pertaining to the Cult of Maat; to Mr. Michael Magee, 
for supporting the work of the O.T.O. in his magazine, Sothis, 
and to Mr. John Symonds for allowing me the use of 
Crowley’s writings. 

Finally, I wish to thank the following artists who have 
generously permitted the inclusion of their drawings or 
paintings: Steffi Grant, Margaret Cook, Janice R. Ayers, Jan 
Bailey, Michael Bertiaux, Allen Holub, David Smith, and 
Frederick Seaton. 


Part One: 
Trees of Eternity 





Introduction 


THE Tree of Life is a key to occult power in both a mys¬ 
tical and a magical sense. Numerous books have been written 
about the Ten Sephiroth and the Twenty Two Paths evolved 
by human consciousness in its attempt to comprehend macro- 
cosmic powers in terms of microcosmic values. Occultism in 
the West, however, has been dominated by interpretations 
that take into account only the positive aspect of this great 
symbol. The other side, the negative or averse side of the 
Tree has been kept out of sight and sedulously ignored. But 
there is no day without night, and Being itself cannot be 
without reference to Non-Being of which it is the inevitable 
manifestation. 

Any allusions to this aspect of the Tree and its branches 
have been subsumed under opprobrious heads or related to 
the infernal realm of the Qliphoth, the world of shells or 
shadows that is none other than our world as we know it, 
without the transforming light of magical consciousness. 

Full magical initiation is not possible without an under¬ 
standing of the so-called qliphotic paths which are, in practice, 
as real as the shadow of any object illumined by the sun. In 
other words, the well-lit highways of Horns, the paths that 
man has projected to connect the cosmic power-zones 
(Sephiroth) with his own consciousness, have their counter¬ 
parts in the Tunnels of Set, a dark web or nocturnal network 


2 


Introduction 


3 


Nightside of Eden 

of paths, the very existence of which is denied or ignored by 
those who are unable to realize the total truth of the Tree 
and its validity for those who would climb even its lower 
branches. 

The mind is beguiled with promises of ‘cosmic conscious¬ 
ness’ and the senses are lulled to sleep or bewitched by the 
constant reiteration that if we spread our wings and fly we 
shall attain to the topmost branches in the space of a single 
life-time. But do those who speak so glibly of enlightenment, 
and who brush aside with apparent ease the averse sides of 
the power-zones with which they boast familiarity, do they 
really imagine that one side only exists? It is futile and false 
to imagine a coin with one side only. 

It is only after mastering the world of shadows within 
himself in the form of the arch-demons, anger, lust, and pride, 
that man may truly claim to be Lord of the Shining Wheels 
or Discs. 1 

It was partly due to Frater Achad’s work on the Tree 2 that 
I first realized the multi-dimensional nature of its many 
aspects. It then assumed for me a totally different form; it 
was no longer a mere diagram symbolizing a precise though 
complex system of spiritual attainment; it came alive, 
rounded out, and appeared as different from a diagram as a 
country from its map. I became aware that the Tree had not 
only a top and a bottom, but a front and a back, and although 
Achad did not develop his thesis in quite the way in which I 
then began to view the matter, he was nonetheless aware of 
its backward implications. This fact may be appreciated by a 
study of his Formula of Reversal in connection with magical 
words of power, and his interpretation of certain verses of 
The Book of the Law? It struck me at that time 4 that if the 

1 1.e. the ten Sephiroth. (See Diagram of Tree). 

The Anatomy of the Body of God , Being The Supreme Revelation of cosmic 
Consciousness, by Frater Achad (Charles Stansfeld Jones) Chicago, 1925. 
Reprinted recently by Samuel Weiser, New York. 

A book received by direct transmission in 1904 by Aleister Crowley. See 
Aleister Crowley & the Hidden God, Muller, 1973. 

In the year 1952 e.v., when I was reforming the O.T.O. and composing rituals 
later used in New Isis Lodge. See The Magical Revival Muller, 1972. 


Sephiroth were seen as globes rather than as wheels or discs, 
the paths deepened accordingly and appeared not as flat 
aridities between the power-zones, but as tunnels boring 
deeply into space, for the Tree as a whole is rooted in the 
inner and mystical voids of multidimensional consciousness 
which cannot be adequately represented by a two dimensional 
diagram. 

I am fully aware that the averse regions of the power- 
zones are dangerous territory, and at the outset I would 
remind those who feel that such an exploration had better 
not be made that one cannot begin this initiation, or journey 
inward, as one begins one’s ascent from Malkuth, 5 for only 
by projecting consciousness through Daath, 6 the Gate of the 
Abyss, can one enter the Kingdom of infernal spaces that is 
under the dominion of Choronzon. 7 One has therefore to be 
familiar with these paths before one can enter the Deep Place 
where they continue, not as well-lit Ways of Horns plainly 
signposted in the light of day, but as the Tunnels of Set that 
turn and twist like a serpent, or like the entrails of that name¬ 
less God of the Gulf whose darkness makes possible, by 
contrast, their light counterparts. If this is borne in mind it 
will not be necessary to charge me with irresponsibility 
towards those who may be lured, even against their will, to 
commence a journey for which they are improperly equipped 
and which may therefore prove fatal. 

One other observation seems relevant. During the course of 
writing the three volumes that constitute my Typhonian 
Trilogy 8 an Adept named Michael Bertiaux wrote to me from 
Chicago. His letter was the beginning of a fruitful correspon¬ 
dence during the course of which he sent me the Grade 


S Uie usual mode of procedure is to ascend the Tree from Malkuth to Kether 
via the Middle Pillar. See diagram. 

6 The eleventh power-zone. 

7 See Glossary for a definition of this term which is here used in a sense other 
than that in which Aleister Crowley and others have used it. 

8 See Bibliography. 






4 Nightside of Eden 

Papers of his secret society. 9 I found to my surprise that he 
had, quite independent of my own researches, formulated a 
conception of the Tree of life that comported among its 
many facets the Backward Paths that I here call the Tunnels 
of Set. Although there is no precise alignment of our respec¬ 
tive theories, it is perhaps interesting to note how the two 
conceptions confirm and supplement one another. I therefore 
take this opportunity of drawing the reader’s attention to 
Mr. Bertiaux’s treatment of the subject. 

This brings me to the final point: Unless occultism becomes 
creative in the sense of opening up new approaches, modi¬ 
fying and developing traditional concepts and generally 
revealing a little more of that Supreme Goddess whose 
identity is hidden behind the veil of Isis, Kali, Nuit, or Sothis, 
there will be stagnation in the swamp of beliefs rendered 
inert by the recent swift acceleration of humanity’s con¬ 
sciousness, which is little short of miraculous. If the science 
of the unmanifest is not to remain grounded at a pre- 
pubescent stage, while the manifested sciences soar into 
space, the mature occultist must put aside the toys of super¬ 
stition and face fearlessly the Trees of Eternity whose trunks 
and branches glow with solar fire, but whose roots are 
nourished in the dark. 

9 The Monastery of the Seven Rays, which includes the Cult of the Black 
Snake (La Couleuvre Noire). See particularly the Grade Papers appurtenant to 
the 4th Year Course. 


1 


The Place of the Cross 


THE SEPHIROTH were described by the ancient qabalists 
as divine emanations of the Absolute. The word sephiroth is 
the plural form of the Hebrew word sephira, meaning 
‘number’ or ‘emanation’. The Ten Sephiroth represent the 
emergence from the ^4m (the Nothingness which is beyond 
Unity) via the scale of the numbers one to nine, of the Divine 
Vibration, and its return again to the Void via Malkuth where 
Unity (1) becomes Nought (0) again. 

During the course of the development of occult science the 
numbers one to ten came to signify centres or zones of 
cosmic power, and in order to bring their nature within range 
of human comprehension they were allotted various planetary 
representatives. 

Pluto represents the outermost power-zone, the pylon set 
at the utmost rim of the planetary system beyond which 
stretch the vasts of Outer Space. When applied to the micro¬ 
cosm (the world of human consciousness) Pluto represents 
the pylon at the gates of the sanctuary of Inner Space. 
Kether, the Crown of the System in the Outer and in the 
Inner, is thus equivalent to the Height (and Depth) of physical 
and psychological space. It is essential to grasp this fact in 
order to understand why Malkuth, the tenth and final sephira, 
is equivalent to that which, for want of a better term, may be 
indicated by the term anti-matter. I say indicated, because 






The Qabalistic Tree of Life showing the ten Sephiroth and twenty-two 
paths with their major astrological, elemental, and tarotic attributions, 
arranged according to the initiated Occult Tradition 


The Place of the Cross 7 

neither Kether nor Malkuth can be described in terms of 
mundane logic. The qabalists alluded to Kether by such titles 
as The Ancient of Days, the White Head, the Supreme Point. 1 
Similarly, in the esoteric teachings of Tantricism (Buddhist 
and Hindu alike), Nirvana and Samsara 2 are considered to be 
identical. Yet the concept of Samsara is not, strictly speaking, 
confined to Malkuth, for all the other Sephiroth up to and 
including Kether form part of it; in other words, they are all 
concepts and therefore objectivisations of subjectivity. As 
objects they are illusory, for Ain (subjectivity) alone IS, and 
the nature of its being is NOT. But, as an approximate 
analogy it is useful because it brings oriental doctrine into 
alignment with the Western Occult Tradition. 

There are innumerable treatises on the qabalistic Tree of 
Life and it is presumed that the reader is acquainted with 
some of them. It is not intended here to go over ground 
already covered many times before, but to analyse the 
qabalistic scheme as a map of cosmic power-zones interacting 
and impinging upon man at every point of his being, for there 
is no single element in man that does not vibrate in accord 
with the rhythm of the numbers one to nine, and their 
modifications. (See diagram of Tree). It is evident that no 
human being, however advanced he may be towards the 
attainment of cosmic consciousness, can transcend Kether 
and explore the trans-plutonic voids, either in the outer spaces 
of the physical universe or in the inner spaces of his own 
inscrutable individuality. To do so would imply that he had 
quitted altogether and forever the realm of human conscious¬ 
ness, perhaps to become one with God, for, whatever that 
term may mean the state which it implies can have no pos¬ 
sible meaning within the framework of dualistic experience, 
and is therefore without the scope of the present enquiry. As 
if to compensate for this forbidden journey, however, the 
Tree provides a single loophole through which the human will 
may project itself, and it is this ‘hole in space’ that forms the 

1 The bindu or indivisible point of the Tantras. 

2 Literally the moving thing; i.e. the world-appearance; this universe. 







8 Nightside of Eden 

outer pylon hidden in the abyss of consciousness (the Uncon¬ 
scious) which separates the supernal sephirotic triad (Kether- 
Chokmah-Binah) from the remainder of the Tree. To go 
astray in this Desert of Set is to become what is known as a 
Black Brother. His fate is perhaps unique. 3 

The name given by qabalists to this Gate of the Gulf is 
Daath, and in occult tradition it is the place at which the 
eight-headed dragon of the deep disappeared behind the Tree 
when it scaled it in an unsuccessful attempt to strike at the 
very heart of god-head (i.e. Kether). The word Daath instantly 
suggests the name of that other gateway which opens upon 
the void of personal extinction, i.e. Death. These terms, 
Daath and Death, do indeed have a mystical affinity and it is 
no refutation of this fact that the words are in different 
languages, for the salient elements of both words D A Th are 
qabalistically equivalent to the number 474. 4 One of the 
meanings of Daath is Knowledge’. It is called ‘the sephira 
that is not a sephira ’. In one aspect it is the child of Chokmah 
and Binah; in another, it is the Eighth Head of the Stooping 
Dragon, raised up when the Tree of Life was shattered and 
Macroprosopus set a flaming sword against Microprosopus. 5 
By permutation Doth (Daath) equates with OThD, another 
Hebrew word, meaning a ‘ram’ or an ‘he-goat’; it is also the 
number of the Greek word duo, meaning ‘two’. 6 The double 
is the eidolon, doll, or shadow, glyphed by the ancient 
Egyptians by the Tat which is equivalent to Doth. Daath is 
also the Home of Choronzon, the Guardian of the Gate of 
the Abyss. Gathering together these various meanings we see 
that the Knowledge of Daath, or Death, is of the nature of 
the secret of Duality represented by the shadow or magical 
double whereby man overcomes death and enters in at the 
gate of Daath to explore the Abode of Choronzon, the 
Desert of Set. 

3 'See Part Two. 

4 The letter ‘A’ being taken as Ayin, 70. 

s This is explained in due course. 

® For an explanation of duality in terms of the Double or Devil symbolized by 
the ithyphallic goat, see The Magical Revival. Muller, 1972 


The Place of the Cross 9 

Daath as the child of Chokmah and Binah 7 is attributed to 
Uranus which indicates the highly explosive nature of this 
‘knowledge’. Neptune, as Chokmah, is a form of Hadit, and 
Saturn, as Binah, is a form of Nuit. 8 This knowledge, there¬ 
fore, is the knowledge of Life which is also the knowledge of 
Death, and, as such, it suggests the sexual nature of its 
formula. In The Book of the Law 9 Hadit declares: 

I am the flame that bums in every heart of man and in the core of 

every star. I am Life, and the giver of Life, yet therefore is the 

knowledge of me the knowledge of death. 

If for death we read Daath the verse assumes a profounder 
meaning for it is then seen to be a secret key of Hadit’s 
function. Hadit is Shaitan or Set, Lord of the Desert and of 
the Great Gate of the Gulf whose guardian is Choronzon. The 
word or name Choronzon is in all probability a corruption of 
Chozzar 10 whose symbol, the trident, equates him with 
Neptune-Nodens, the God of the Deep.Thus, Hadit (Neptune) 
and Nuit (Saturn), the dual principles of life, combine to 
form the averse or Choronzonic principle of Daath and Death; 
for this knowledge (Daath) is of the averse, reverse, or back 
side of the Tree. 

Daath was described by the qabalists as the false sephira 
because it had no place in the scheme of numbers from one 
to ten, no place that is in the dimension represented by the 
front or obverse of the Tree. In consequence it was con¬ 
sidered to be the eleventh sephira. Eleven is the number of 
magick, of ‘energy tending to change’, which is the precise 
formula of the Operation of Daath, and the reason for its 
association with death as the supreme type of change. 

In the Tantric scheme of chakras, or microcosmic power- 
zones, Daath is attributed to the Zone of the Word, the 

7 Chokmah=Wisdom; Binah=Understanding. See diagram of the Tree. 

«See The Book of the Law and its comments for an explanation of these terms. 

’Chapter 2, verse 6. 

10 Tbe god of Atlantean Magic. But see Cults of the Shadow for a fuller 
definition. 




10 Nightside of Eden 

Visuddha or throat-centre. 11 This centre represents speech, 
but the Word in its occult sense of the True Voice (Ma Kheru) 
may be uttered only by a Magus, whose natural provenance 
is the second sephira, Chokmah, assigned to Hadit. The II 
(two) and the 11 (eleven) thus meet in Daath, the sphere of 
knowledge, for knowledge is possible only where duality 
(two; duo, II) prevails. These two — subject and object — 
unite, and their union causes change, which is the formula of 
magick. Union occurs in consciousness, where the act is 
reflected as in a mirror, and the act opens the gate through 
which the Will (Hadit) is projected. Its image appears in the 
mirror-world 12 at the back of the Tree and in reverse, for in 
that dimension time flows backward, and man reverts to ape. 
The cynocephalus was chosen, therefore, as a magical symbol 
of the Word by the ancient Egyptians who attributed it to 
the moon-god, Thoth. The name of this god is equivalent to 
Doth 13 (Daath) and it is significant that the moon is attri¬ 
buted to the kala that rays from Kether through the abyss to 
the solar or heart-centre of the cosmos. 14 The reflection of 
the sun (human consciousness) in the waters of the abyss is 
thus symbolized by Thoth and his cynocephalus as the man 
and his dog reflected in the moon. The cynocephalus or 
dog-headed ape utters the Word of the Magus (Hadit- 
Chokmah) in reverse. Frater Achad had an inkling of these 
mysteries and it led him to enunciate his Formula of 
Reversion. 15 At about the same period the artist Austin 
Spare, working along similar lines, realized that in order to 
become God, man must regress to the primal or original state 
of consciousness. 16 This is the ultimate rationale behind the 
attempts by occultists of all ages to leap backward and 

11 See Cults of the Shadow chapter 1, for a detailed account of this zone and 
its relation to the eightfold cross of the kolas. 

12 Known in some mystery schools as the mirroir fantastique. See Michael 
Bertiaux; Grade Papers of the MSR. 

13 The letter ‘d’ is the later and elided form of ‘t’. 

14 Represented on the tree by the sephira Tiphereth which typifies enlightened 


The Place of the Cross 11 

inward to the interior depths of the Tree, thereby reverting 
to the pre-eval state of consciousness before Kether trans¬ 
mitted the current of manifestation from the Eye of the Void 
(Ain). 17 Many magicians go astray on that backward journey, 
their consciousness assumes forms of larval life that ante¬ 
dated the human. Then the Ape of Thoth mocks them as 
they struggle to extricate themselves from a swiftly accelerat¬ 
ing reversion of consciousness that finally hurls them into 
oblivion. Such is the fate peculiar to Adepts who, nurturing 
their animal propensities while in the abyss, assume the form 
of beasts 18 without first relinquishing the tendencies of the 
ego to use for personal ends the powers which these creatures 
symbolize. 

We may thus posit anti-worlds based upon the application 
of each sephira to its opposite, thereby obtaining a glimpse 
not only of the back of the Tree, but of the Tree’s total 
reversal in respect of its obverse, which constitutes the world 
of appearances. 19 We may in this way formulate not only an 
anti-world or zone of anti-matter, but also a zone of anti¬ 
spirit represented by Kether inverted behind Malkuth. But 
let us not fall into Achad’s error of regarding these specula¬ 
tions as actual facts of spiritual consciousness. Rather, let us 
use the idea of them as a springboard which may launch us 
into inner spaces of consciousness that comport, each in their 
turn, the hell 20 or hole of each power-zone. 

Ain means ‘nothing’, ‘void’, the non-manifest. It also means an Eye, Ayin, 
which has the numerical value of 70. For the significance of this important 
number see later. 

1 *This is the origin of magical lycanthropy and similar occult phenomena. 

19 i.e. the phenomenal woiid; our universe. 

20 The ancient Finns used a most appropriate word to designate ‘hell’, viz: 
‘tuonda’, a tunnd. In a physical sense this word implies a subterranean passage; in 
a psychological sense, the subconsciousness, and in a macroscosmic sense it 
implies the sub-nudear world of anti-matter, the black hole in space of which the 
mythological hell, with its annihilating fires, is the symbol. 


15 See Liber XXXI, by Frater Achad. Sothis Magazine vol. L No. iii. 
16 See The Booh of Pleasure by Austin Osman Spare. Reprinted 1975. 





13 


2 


Qabalah of the Primal Gnosis 


THE PRIMITIVE interpretation of phenomena was of a 
physical nature, we can therefore fathom the gnosis or meta¬ 
physical application of primal symbols only by understanding 
the special magical significance which the ancients attached 
to the numbers nought to ten, nought being the Ain, the 
non-manifest and noumenal source of manifestation. In the 
Chaldean qabalah the letters Aleph to Yod (1-10) resume the 
origin and development of the primal emanation from the 
Ain, and it is only by grasping the meaning of these numbers 
in relation to physical phenomena that we may penetrate the 
arcana of the metaphysical symbolism that eventually 
became the language of The Mysteries. 

The primal reckoning is retained by the Chaldean and 
Hebrew letters, each letter being also a number; and these 
numbers with their primitive meanings have been preserved 
in the qabalah almost unspoilt in their transition from African 
originals via Egypt. The tradition is preserved also by the 
ancient British Barddas who claim that they ‘began with ten 
original signs which Beli reduced to the value of letters, and 
then added six others, making sixteen in all’. Although it is 
not necessary at this stage to introduce the sixteen kalas, 1 

1 Literally essences, principles, elements etc. The kalas are divisions of time 
and in the Tantras they have a very special connotation, being connected with 
certain physical secretions that are represented in the qabalah and the tarot by 
magical glyphs which it is the purpose of my books to explain. See The Typhonian 
Trilogy. 


Qabalah of the Primal Gnosis 

the reader should retain the concept in mind while reading 
the present chapter. The kalas are mentioned here to show 
the unity of the earliest arcana and their existence at a period 
usually considered to have ante-dated, by vast cycles of time, 
the later and derivative, or ‘metaphysical mysteries’. Here, 
as elsewhere, the Mysteries were physical at first and assumed 
the metaphysical veils of the Arcane Traditions as the 
phsycial truths became obscured and forgotten by all but the 
few. It should also be understood that the range of pheno¬ 
mena comprehended as physical was infinitely more expansive 
than it is today. For example, in primitive times, the ghost 
or double (the astral body) was an observed phenomenon 
that had no need of demonstration. It was in later ages, when 
humanity lost contact with its natural rootage, that the ghost 
came to be considered as an unusual or abnormal pheno¬ 
menon. In ancient times the world of spirits was everywhere 
acknowledged because it was a matter of direct experience 
and open to all but the most insensitive. The world of spirits 
was as familiar to primitive man as is the dream world to 
modem man. The spirit world became the later ‘spiritual’ 
world after undue emphasis on mans’ mental development 
had obliterated almost entirely the astral world in which he 
originally had moved with as much ease as in the mundane 
world. In fact, little difference was made between the two. 
This peculiarity, which appears strange to Western peoples, 
still characterizes the Asiatic who to this day makes no 
precise distinction between swapna (dream state) and jagrat 
(wakeful state). 

The alphabetical ideographs from Aleph to Yod, therefore, 
resume the entire process of the emanation and development 
of phenomenal existence, although we must not expect to 
find total agreement between the original ideas represented 
by the letters and later interpretations that various traditions 
have discreted about them. 

The Ain, or Eye of the Void, represents absolutely No 
Thing. It is non-manifestation pure and simple. From it alone 
can manifestation proceed. The first formulation of No Thing, 




14 Nightside of Eden 

its reflection or reverse image, was Some Thing, and this was 
represented by the number One, Aleph. The symbol attached 
to this number, which is also a letter, the letter ‘A’, is that of 
a calf, the youngling; it was the child of the mother whom it 
had cleaved open in breaking from the womb or opening of 
the Abyss (Ain). The calf is thus the symbol of the Calif as 
the first cleaver or maker of the cleft. It was the clef or key 
of the mysteries of Initiation; the calf or ‘child’ of all later 
mythologies. 

According to the tarot of the Egyptians, the child was the 
fool or innocent babe represented by the whirling cross, 2 the 
thunderbolt which broke open the firmament; he was also 
the madman who capered on the brink of the abyss. But the 
first deity was a goddess, the Mother, and her child was her 
symbol . 3 The child, being of either sex, came to be the 
symbol of neither, a neuter being which gave its name to 
deity in ancient Egyptian as nuter or neter — the gods; the 
neutral potential of positive and negative creation, male and 
female. The ox, later equated with Aleph in the symbolism of 
the Jews, continues this type of sexlessness characteristic of 
the calf or chUd. 

In the second letter, B or Beth, we therefore discern the 
glyph of the biune god who is both (Beth) male and female, 
yet, being so, was neither the one nor the other, but the 
androgyne or hermaphrodite. Beth was ascribed to the 
Magician or the Juggler, 4 the twofold One who, on attaining 
puberty, becomes replete with creative potential symbolized 
by the camel, the letter gimel, which is the number three. 
In One Person are thus resumed the trinity of powers from 
Aleph, the Fool or innocent babe, through Beth the androgy¬ 
nous bi-sexual deity, to the fully equipped sexual procreator, 

2 The Swastika, which is by shape the letter Aleph. 

3 The phenomenal child typical of the ‘babe of the abyss’ who is twin as 
Set-Horus, or Hoor-paar-Kraat unmanifest, and Ra-Hoor-Khuit manifest. Their 
astronomical analogues are Sirius ‘A’ (Horns) and Sirius ‘B’ (Set). See Magick by 
Aleister Crowley for a full explanation of these terms. 

4 In the Tarot. 


Qabalah of the Primal Gnosis 15 

the child in his thirteenth year. 5 On the Tree of Life, the 
thirteenth path is that of the Camel, the denizen of the desert, 
the seat or power-zone of the god Set. In later symbolism the 
kala of this path was referred to the virgin priestess of the 
Silver Star (i.e. the moon), 6 and the number thirteen 
expresses the lunar nature of this symbolism. 7 In the earliest 
tradition — i.e. the Sothiac — this is the path of the virgin, 
the sleeping or entranced priestess on her way to becoming 
oracular with the Voice of Power. She is the forthspeaker of 
Daath, and her totem is the cynocephalus whose word is not 
of humanity but part of ‘a weird and monstrous speech’ 8 
that becomes intelligible on earth (i.e. phenomenally) when it 
is transmitted through the door of the abyss. The door, or 
Daleth, is represented by the Woman, the Wife, the Mother — 
Isis, the sister or manifest reflection of Nephthys, the original 
and invisible Eye (Ain). 9 

The supernal triad that links the cosmic power-zones, 
Kether-Chokmah-Binah, is formed by the kalas emanating 
from Aleph, the eleventh kala, Beth the twelfth kala, and 
Gimel the thirteenth kala. The thirteenth kala crosses Daleth, 
the fourteenth kala, which represents the complete formu¬ 
lation of the sexual act in a cosmic sense. Aleph, the whirling 
thunderbolt, is the glyph of Air or Space; Beth is the double- 
wanded One, the Magician (male and female), and Gimel is 
the lunar reflection of the Ain across the Desert of Set. And 
Daleth, number Four, resumes the formula of the union of 
these concepts. 10 The junction forms the precise point of 

s On the Tree of Life it is the 13th path that is ascribed to gimel, and it marks 
the place of the Cross or Crossing, which occurs at the exact locus of Daath 
behind the Veil of the Abyss, for Daath is the reflection of the Void {Ain) in the 
domain of mystical phenomena. 

6 There are thirteen moons to a lunar year; 28 x 13 - 364. 

7 The moon is under the aegis of Hecate who is identical with Sothis, thus connec¬ 
ting this symbolism with the Secret tradition of the Argenteum Astrum (The A.'. 
A.'.), the Order of the Silver Star. This is a magical Order which Aleister Crowley con¬ 
structed from the debris of the Golden Dawn, after he had established contact with 
extra-terrestrial intelligences (Secret Chiefs) which MacGregor Mathers had failed 
to achieve. See The Magical Revival (Muller, 19 72) for a full account of this matter. 

8 Liber Liberi vel Lapidis Lazuli (Crowley), verse 10. 

9 Nu-Isis is the glyph of this dual negative or double absence, symbolized 
magically as a feminine source of creation. 

1 °The letter Daleth is ascribed to Venus, the goddess of love or sexual union. 




16 Nightside of Eden 

ingress of the ophidian forces that swarm behind the Veil in 
the waters of the Abyss. This crossing is enacted by man via 
the mechanics of sexual magick, which aims at bringing 
humanity into conscious intercourse with entity behind the 
Veil. The cross and the crossing are of prime importance in 
the formula of initiation, for they reflect the cosmic process 
of manifestation from non-manifestation. The Book of the 
Law opens with this act, with the words: ‘Had! the manifes¬ 
tation of Nuit’, which reads — according to the keys of the 
earliest symbolism: ‘Set! the child of Typhon’. Set is the 
child that opens the womb of the Goddess; he is the eternal 
babe (of the Abyss) who, on coming of age 11 reveals himself 
as the first male deity — the son of the Mother, Nuit, who 
was the earlier Typhon. ‘The unveiling of the company of 
heaven’, the second verse of The Book of the Law, refers to 
the Veil of the Abyss rent by Set to establish the Aleph, the 
One: Something, where previously Nothing alone existed. 
The phrase ‘company of heaven’ denotes the stars; this com¬ 
pany also is Set or Sept 12 which is composed of the seven 
stars of the Goddess of whom he was the height or eighth, as 
explained at length in the Trilogy. 

As Set opened his mother when he clave her womb with 
the thunderbolt of his clef or aleph, so Sothis was the opener 
of the year in the primal symbolism of Khem (Egypt). ‘Every 
man and every women is a star’ (3rd verse oiAL) 13 declares 
that humanity possesses the potential for this ‘opening’, not 
only in a mystical and spiritual sense but also in the magical 
and esoteric sense of opening the Gate of the Abyss by the 
secret formulae of sexual magick that are hidden in AL and 
in the ancient books of power. From this it follows that, as 
the next verse proclaims, ‘Every number is infinite; there is 
no difference’. Every number, and therefore every letter, is 
but a ray or kala proceeding from the Abyss and shining as a 

1 *Le. attaining magical power, or pubescence. 

12 Sept is the star Sothis or Sirius. 

13 The Book of the Law or Liber AL vel Legis hereafter referred to simply as 


Qabalah of the Primal Gnosis 17 

star in heaven and as a soul on earth, as the forces flow in 
from the Ain and manifest at the place of the crossing. This 
locus is the ‘double horizon’ where the sun dips down to 
Amenta in the West 14 and rises in the East. ls The rising of 
the sun is the beginning of manifestation; its setting, the 
return to the Abyss of non-manifestation. The number four, 
Daleth, typifies this fourfold crossing. 

He, the number five represents total manifestation; it is the 
glyph of Woman par excellence. Her full formula is 15 (3 x 5). 
The symbolism of the Goddess Fifteen has been treated at 
length in the Trilogy. Here it suffices to draw attention to 
the identity of the Hand (as a figure of five), and the Eye, 
as the illuminator of the Void. These two magical instruments 
are primary in Austin O. Spare’s Zos Kia Cultus where they 
fuse into the Atmospheric ‘I’, or cosmic consciousness. 16 Five 
is the number of the feminine principle in its lunar phase. In 
the original rendering of AL.1.60, the goddess Nuit begins a 
sentence of which Crowley heard only the first six words, 17 
afterwhich there occurred a hiatus in the manuscript which 
was filled in later by the hand of the Scarlet Woman, 18 which 
completed the sentence thus: ‘The Five Pointed Star, with a 
Circle in the middle, & the circle is Red . . ,’ 19 That is to say, 
the star ( khabs) is of five rays ( kalas) which enclose, as do the 
five petals of a flower, its central circle. The circle is red 
because it symbolizes the blood-cycle characteristic of the 
female in her lunar phase. The five kalas concentrate and 
reify the sixth or creative energy that abides in the heart of 
the flower as the child in the woman. Six is the name and 
number of sex and it is represented by the letter Vau which 

14 The earlier North, equating with Death, Daath. 

1 s The earlier South, equating with Life, Tiphcreth. 

16 See Images and Oracles of Austin Osman Spare by Kenneth Grant, Muller, 
1975. 

1 7 The shape of my star is . ..’ 

18 Rose Crowley, nee Kelly. The Scarlet Woman is a term denoting a priestess 
consecrated to the Mysteries of Ophidian Magick. See Aleister Crowley & the 
Hidden God (1973). 

19 See the photofacsimile of the original manuscript of AL reproduced in The 
Magical and Philosophical Commentaries on The Book of the Law, 93 Publishing, 
Montreal, 1974. 




18 Nightside of Eden 

means a ‘nail’, the unguis or phallic symbol of virility. The 
child is twin and wields the sword ( Zain) which cleaves 
open his mother. 

Zain is the number seven, the number of sexual love. This 
number origin silly signified the womb through the symbolism 
of the Goddess of the Seven Stars, Ursa Major, the constel¬ 
lation of the Thigh which typified the birthplace of Light in 
the Dark of the Abyss. 20 Seven later became the number of 
Venus, the planetary representative of the Goddess, when the 
concept was romanticized and applied to sexual love between 
humans as distinct from the primary and stellar symbolism 
that signified bestial congress. 21 Seven thus became synony¬ 
mous with the mechanism of sexual polarity symbolized by 
Gemini (the letter attributed to which is Zain) under the 
influence of Mercury, the masculine aspect of Venus or, more 
correctly, the positive aspect of the hermaphroditic polarity 
typified by the sephiroth Hod and Netzach (see diagram of 
Tree). Zain is mystically associated with the yoni, the secret 
or hidden eye ( ayin ) which, together with the letter ‘z’ — the 
letter of the serpent — becomes Z-ayin or Zain. I have pre¬ 
viously indicated 22 the peculiar affinity which exists between 
Zain and the Age of Aquarius which is interlinked with the 
Aeon of Horns. 23 In this present Air or Space age, Zam is of 
major importance as being the S(word) of the Serpent, which is 
Silence. Hence, in the most secret Mystery Cults the Aeon of 
Zain is said to be devoid of a Word. It is the silent trans¬ 
mission of sexual energy in polarity that vibrates the Word in 
Silence, and that Word is as a Sword that cleaves the Abyss 
and it is heard of No-One. It is said that in the Aeon of Zain 
‘humanity is booked for a turn round the back of the Tree’, 
which explains why no word will be heard, for there will be 

20 i-e. the Abyss as the nightsky or gulf of space. 

21 Note that the number Zain, 7, is, by shape, the equivalent of the nutersign 
of deity — the reason being that the child, the neuter one, was taken by the 
ancients to signify neither male nor female, but both; and, as the symbol of sexual 
creation seven was adopted as the axe sign (^) which typifies the cleaving of the 
womb by the child as it springs to birth as a result of love. 

22 Cults of the Shadow, page 16. 

2 3 Ibid, chapter 8. 


Qabalah of the Primal Gnosis 19 

No-One (Nun = the Abyss) to hear it. The subject-object 
relationship will have ceased to exist. The Serpent and the 
Sword are the dual glyph of this arcanum and such is the 
special emblem of Set. 

In Liber 333 2 * (chapter 87), the sigil of the Sword and the 
Serpent appears in connection with a certain excremental 
symbolism that has been erroneously interpreted by ignorant 
detractors of Aleister Crowley. Occultists, however, are aware 
that both the Serpent and the Sword may be interpreted as 
symbols of the female in her lunar phase. In his brief 
comment to chapter 87, Crowley observes that the sigil 
derives from a Gnostic talisman that ‘refers to the Sacrament’. 
The nature of the sacrament is lunar and it is therefore no 
surprise to find that 87 2s is the number of Lebanah (frankin¬ 
cense) which pertains to the Sphere of the Moon. It is also 
the number of Asvk (a form of Aossic 26 ), meaning ‘chalice’, 
‘calyx’, ‘part of a flower’. The flower is the flow-er or flowing 
one, i.e. the female in her courses. The chalice of the flowing 
one is the vagina of the virgin. The chalice in the Mysteries is 
concealed behind the veil which in its primal and biological 
sense is the hymen. Cheth, the number eight, means a ‘fence’, 
‘vallum’ or ‘wall’; it is the Veil enclosing the Graal, the curtain 
concealing the Holy of Holies. This is also the mystical Veil 
of Paroketh (Paro-cheth) which was rent asunder the moment 
that deity became active and uttered the Word in oracles of 
thunder. Cheth , spelt in full, is 418, the number of Abraha- 
dabra which signifies the uniting of the positive and negative 
currents, the accomplishment of the Great Work. The 
zoomorphic totem of its astrological analogue, Cancer, reveals 
the mechanism of viparita karani 27 under the figure of the 

24 The Booh of Lies (Falsely so called) by Aleister Crowley. First published in 
1913. The Comment was published posthumously by Samuel Weiscr in New 
York, 1970. 

25 The chapter numbers of Liber 333, as all the numbers that appear in 
Crowley’s expressly Thelemic writings (i.e. the Holy Books) are not arbitrary but 
have qabalistic significance. 

2 6 See Part II, chapter 3 infra. 

27 A Sanskrit term used in the Tantras to denote the reversion of the senses. 
See the Trilogy for a full explanation. 



20 Ntghtside of Eden 

crab whose sideways mode of locomotion is a fitting symbol 
of the oblique or crooked path. In the earliest Egyptian plani¬ 
spheres the beetle precedes the crab as the sign of the mid¬ 
night sun (Khepra), the solar light protected from the deluge 
of the abyss (Nile) by its being hidden in a ball of excrement 
which the beetle pilots to safety with its mandibles. This 
symbolism resumes the active and dynamic aspect of the Sigil 
of Set explained in connection with the letter Zain, for the 
Nile deluge symbolizes the womb-flood that pours forth and 
threatens the life of the solar-phallic seed. But the symbolism 
has also a profounder meaning. 

The red circle at the centre of the five or fifteen kalas 
(3 x 5) is the flower or flowing one wherein the bindu 28 
resides. In this connection, Alvin Kuhn’s observations are 
relevant: 

The male creative fluid ... is the concentrated essence of the blood, 
which in turn is highly charged with the electric soul of spiritual 
energy. It was the seed of the god’s creative essence. It was therefore 
held to be a condensation of solar energy. 19 

Teth, meaning a ‘serpent’, is the number nine. In the later 
Osirian Cults the serpent was equated with solar-phallic 
energy in the form of the lion-serpent which generated the 
spermatozoon. 30 In the Draconian Tradition, however, Teth 
is the serpent symbolic of the female who periodically 
sloughs her old body as does the snake its skin. Hence, nine 
is the number of rejuvenation and renewal. In Crowley’s 
interpretation of the Atus of Thoth, Teth combines the lion, 
the woman, and the serpent, in one glyph that constitutes the 
eleventh key of the Tarot. Owing to a change in the sequence 
of the Keys of the Major Arcana, 31 Atus VIII and XI were 
transposed. This caused a corresponding transposition of the 
letters Lamed and Teth , 32 The formula of Woman (ascribed 
to Libra) then becomes Atu VIII, and that of the lion-serpent 

28 A Sanskrit term used in the Tantras to denote the creative seed. 

29 Alvin Boyd Kuhn, The Lost Light, p. 503. 

30 The yod or ‘secret seed; the number ten. Vide infra. 

31 Crowley was required to make the change in accordance with instructions 
in AL. See Commentaries on AL. 


Qabalah of the Primal Gnosis 21 

(ascribed to Leo), Atu XL The combination of Lamed and 
Teth (or 30 and 9) conceals a great mystery, for the number 
39 is thrice 13 and is also 93 in reverse. Furthermore, the 
number VHI, the number of Cheth, is the number of the 
Great Work. The fact that Atu XI 33 now forms the balance 
of VIII signifies that the Great Work is of a basically psycho¬ 
somatic nature involving the magical use of sexual energy. 

Yod , the number ten, 10, is the sum total or end of the 
matter since it symbolizes the return of Unity (1) to the 
original state of non-duality symbolized by the Ay in (0), the 
Eye of Nuit. This demonstrates the ultimate identity of the 
Eye and the Hand. 34 The latter, being the instrument of the 
holder, container, or womb, is an ideogram of the number 5 
and hence of the female. But the symbolism of the hand 
(yod) in the later or post-Typhonian cults was attributed to 
the solar-phallic seed represented by the drop, point, dot, 
bindu , or spermatozoon. The distinction is one of doctrine 
alone for the primal source of creation was, and will always 
remain, the female whose symbols, Hand (I) and Eye (0), 
denote the mother-blood, the uterus in which and from 
which the Word issues and assumes flesh. 

The foregoing explains the doctrine of numbers according 
to the Typhonian Tradition which, when applied in con¬ 
nection with magical formulae by priests of the later Cults 
was wrenched from its pristine meaning to subserve male- 
dominated societies. 

The eleventh letter - Kaph (K) - begins a new series of 
numbers and is, in its most occult sense, not only the number 
of magick but also of Daath, the eleventh power-zone that is 
considered to exist in a dimension altogether different from 
the ten manifest power-zones or Sephiroth. It is in this oblique 
dimension that exist the six letters Kaph to Pe which form, 
with the primal ten, the 16 secret kalas of the Ophidian 
Current. Kaph means the ‘palm’ (of the hand), and Pe means 
a ‘mouth’. The magical formulae associated with the inner 

33 Hie formula of the Beast conjoined with the Woman. 

34 1he word yod means a ‘hand’. 




22 Nightside of Eden 

hand ( Kaph) or womb, and the secret eye or ‘mouth’ of Pe 
will emerge in subsequent chapters. It may be noted here 
however that Pe is attributed to the martial current which, as 
has been shown, is connected with the blood of Black Isis 
and of Kali. 3 5 

3 5 See Aleister Crowley and the Hidden God. 


3 


The Light that is Not 


ACCORDING TO occult lore Cosmic Consciousness mani¬ 
fests in humanity as sentience which concentrates itself into 
an individualized centre of awareness and splits into subject 
and object. Subject identifies itself with the conscious prin¬ 
ciple as ego, and object is its mechanism of awareness. This 
identification of consciousness with ego is illusory and 
thereby the Principle of Consciousness is veiled. 1 The ego 
imagines itself to be an entity discrete from the objects which 
it senses, and, instead of pure feeling, hearing, seeing, tasting, 
knowing, there is the false assumption that ‘I feel’, ‘I hear’, 
‘I see’, ‘I taste’, ‘I know’. It is thus that the phenomenal 
world (the world of appearances) is represented to us as 
Malkuth. The entire process, from Kether to Malkuth, is one 
of successive veiling accompanied by increasing loss of aware¬ 
ness of the Principle of Consciousness, the whole purpose of 
incarnation being the ‘redemption’ and reintegration of the 
lost Principle. 

Buddhists and Advaitins regard these veils as wholly 
illusory, while others regard them as modifications of the 
original Principle. In whichever light they are regarded the 
problem remains unchanged: how to resolve the perpetual 

I This is described in Liber LXV (verse 56, chapter IV) as the ‘Wrong of the 
Beginning’. It is the essential flaw noted by the Arabs, the original ‘Fall’. 



24 


Nightside of Eden 


game of hide-and-seek 2 which Kether plays through the 
primary veils of subject and object (Chokmah and Binah), 
the nexus of which is located in Daath. The cause of the 
mystery, glamour, or ignorance as the Buddhists call it, is the 
initial and mistaken identification of the Self with its objects. 
This is caused mainly by the fact that, as the Qabalists claim, 
‘Kether is in Malkuth and Malkuth is in Kether, but after a 
different manner’. The presence of Kether in Malkuth 3 
creates an illusion of reality in all objects. This glamour 
engenders sentience which bewilders and drowns the Self in 
delusion. Srf Ramakrishna composed and sang many hymns 
of surpassing beauty to this ‘world-bewitching Maya’ or 
magic play of glamour and illusion generated in the senses of 
humanity which mistake the unreal for the Real. 

Kether is the focus of Cosmic Consciousness, and its first 
manifestation is Light. 4 The Ain, which is its source, is not 
Darkness but Absence of Light, and therefore the true essence 
of Light. Kether is the infinitesimal point in space-time at 
which Absence of Light becomes its Presence by turning the 
Void (Ain) inside out. Kether, and the resulting Tree of Life, 
may therefore be conceived as the interior of the Void mani¬ 
festing in Space, which is the menstruum of Light. 

In the microcosm this Light manifests as the light of 
consciousness that illumines form. It is the light by which, 
and in which, a thought can be visualized in the darkness of 
the mind; as dreams appear in the darkness of sleep. In the 
celestial sphere, consciousness manifests as physical light, the 
sun. In the mineral kingdom it manifests as gold. Biologically 
considered it is the phallus which perpetuates the seed of 
light (consciousness) in the animal kingdom. These lights are 
One Light (Kether) and they proceed from an infinite absence 
of light (Am). As it pours through Kether it is split into three 


... . In this Play is deicribed as a ‘Lila* which has been translated 

divine sport, ‘masque’ or the eternal Dance of Shiva and Shakti. This basic 
tuusion later gave nse to the concept of ‘original sin’ which has been perverted by 
the Christians into a doctrine of moral import. 

He. Consciousness or Subject in all objects. 

4 [The LVX or Light of the Gnosis. 


( 


( 


I 


The Light that is Not 25 

rays which form the three supernal branches of the Tree. 
These have three pylons: Chokmah, Daath, and Binah, thus 
concentrating 16 kalas s which, with their reflection in the 
world of anti-matter (the Ain) constitute the 32 Paths or 
Kalas of the Tree of Life. 

Darkness is absence of light, an absence that makes possible 
the presence of all that appears to be. Non-being, of which 
the symbol is darkness, is the source of Being, and between 
these two terminals is a solution de continuity represented by 
the Abyss which separates the noumenal world of Kether, 
with its twin terminals, 6 from the phenomenal world of 
Malkuth. The precise point of discontinuity is marked by the 
Pylon of Daath in the midst of the Abyss. Daath is knowledge 
of the phenomenal world reflected downward through the 
Tunnels of Set at the back of the Tree. This knowledge, or 
Daath, is the death of the Self. It represents the primary 
stage at which the cerements are woven about the mummy 
that enters Amenta in the Desert of Set. It appears on the 
front of the Tree as the apparently living semblance of the 
ego with which it identifies itself on its gradual descent into 
matter (Malkuth). Its awakening to mundane consciousness 
is in reality a sleep and a death from which the original 
Principle of Consciousness may be salvaged only by travelling 
the Paths of Amenta in reverse. This backward journey 
through the Tunnels of Set commences in the Tuat, the pre¬ 
liminary passage or 32nd Path that leads back from Malkuth 
(mundane consciousness) to the astral spheres of Yesod. 

Oriental traditions have typified this descent of Conscious¬ 
ness in terms of the three states of sushupti (sleeping), svapna 
(dreaming), and jagrat (wakeful) consciousness, and their 
reintegration in a fourth state - turiya - which is not really 
a state at all, but the substratum of the other three and the 
only real element in those three. Turiya equates with Kether 
(Undifferentiated Consciousness), Sushupti equates with 
Daath, Svapna with Yesod, and Jagrat with Malkuth. This 

5 The number of Chokmah is 2; that of Daath, 11; and Binah is 3; 16 kolas in all. 

6 Chokmah (subject), and Binah (object). 


26 Nightside of Eden 

scheme matches the qabalistic doctrine: The state of deep 
and dreamless sleep ( sushupti ) is a state in which mind is not 
conscious of the objective or phenomenal universe. It is void 
in the sense that it is empty of thought (images), and dark in 
the sense that within it light is absent. Sushupti merges into 
Svapna, the state of subjective objectivity, or dreaming, 
because Kether creates in the void of Sushupti a stress that 
manifests as vibration. This stress is mirrored in the dream¬ 
world (Yesod) as sentience latent in the microcosmic power- 
zones ( chakras ) in which it assumes elemental forms of 
ether, fire, air, water, and earth. In other words, this vibration 
manifests as the six senses which, in turn, are projected as 
objective phenomena in the wakeful state {jagrat ; Malkuth). 
In this manner one state or world of consciousness merges 
into another. Similarly, one state or level of Cosmic Con¬ 
sciousness develops and evolves into another until the original 
Principle of Consciousness is objectified with increasing 
density. In this manner the world of ‘name and form’ appears 
to the ego (the pseudo-subject) as ‘reality’, while in actual 
fact Reality withdraws as the Principle of Consciousness 
recedes and returns to the point of its original absence. 

Daath as the ego is the shadow-shakti or veiling power of 
Kether at the lightning-swift moment of its bifurcation into 
Chokmah (subject) and Binah (object). The ego is a shadow, 
but it is the shadow of reality. It is impossible to express this 
concept in the language of duality. Reality is Non-Being, and 
the ego is the reflection or reverse of Reality in the waters of 
the Abyss; but not only is the image reversed, it is also 
inverted. 7 In terms of the Draconian Tradition the ego is the 
mirage that appears in the Desert of Set. 

The exaltation of the ego in Daath and its claim to be the 
Crown 8 is the blasphemy against godhead, and those that set 
up this false idol have been called the Black Brothers. By this 
act they banish themselves to the Desert of Set for the 

See The Great Symbol of Solomon; figure 1 in Transcendental Magic by 
Eliphas Levi. 

8 A title of Kether. 


The Light that is Not 27 

duration of an aeon; or, if profoundly committed to the 
averse hierarchy, they may maintain this shadow-sovereignty 
for ‘an aeon and an aeon and an aeon’, an entire kalpa or 
Great Cycle of Time. The false king endures until the kalpa is 
terminated by a Mahapralaya. 9 Such Black Brothers should 
not, however, be confused with the Black Brothers whose 
idol is not the ego but a certain secret Head of a truly averse 
hierarchy that resumes all the 777 10 paths at the back of the 
Tree. Eliphas Levi hinted at this hierarchy in terms of ‘black 
magic’ and of the Baphometic Head alight with the sulphur 
of hell and adored of the Templars. Another Adept who had 
a glimmering of this Negative Hierarchy was H. P. Blavatsky, 
yet her gargantuan struggle to draw through the veil some 
intimation of its dark mysteries ended only in the massive 
confusion of her two monumental works. 11 Perhaps the Isis 
she sought to unveil was not the Isis of nature manifest in 
matter, but the New Isis of the Unnatural, of anti-matter, 
with its voids of being and black holes in space. Before 
exploring the Tunnels of Set we have to establish the fact 
that the mysteries of Non-Being, although not interpreted 
in ancient times in the way in which we interpret them today, 
were nonetheless regarded as possessing a significance that 
was both vital and menacing. This is the more surprising since 
it is only within the past fifty or so years that these obscure 
matters have been illumined by astonishing discoveries in the 
realms of nuclear and sub-nuclear physics and psychology, 
none of which had been demonstrated scientifically when 
qabalistic doctrine was being evolved. 

Yet another adept of recent times, Salvador Dali, has 
suggested by the dark absences that appear abruptly in some 
of his paintings the doctrine of non-being, of the negative, of 

7 Literally, Great Dissolution. The withdrawal into the Void of the Universe 
after its manifestation in matter. A Mahapralaya occurs after each seven phases of 
manifested existence. See Aleister Crowley & the Hidden God, chapter 4. 

1 °The total number of Paths and Sephiroth of the Tree of Life. 

11 Isis Unveiled and The Secret Doctrine. These works are replete with allusions 
to mysteries that are illuminated by the Draconian Tradition and are explained in 
the present volume. 


28 Nightside of Eden 

the noumenal that is Reality underlying phenomenal 
existence. 12 

Although there is a solution of continuity between the two 
worlds — represented by the front and the back of the Tree — 
there is but one copula, and it resides in a peculiar function of 
the sexuality. It is not a bridge in any positive sense, and 
therefore it may not be described, but it may be adumbrated 
by the analogy of a lightning flashing between invisible elec¬ 
trodes of positive and negative electricity. The interior 
dimensions of non-being can be illumined by the blinding 
radiance liberated by sexual energy discharged in connection 
with certain techniques of Typhonian magick in which pre- 
conceptual energy is seized by the most tenuous tentacles of 
consciousness as it seeps through the veil of the void from the 
transplutonic eye {Ain) beyond Kether. 

The Book of Dzyan, The Book of the Law, and the 
Thelemic Holy Books, all of which have been made available 
during the past century, contain magical formulae that have 
been used from time immemorial, but there is as yet no 
adequate commentary to any of them, for both Blavatsky 
and Crowley — advanced as they undoubtedly were — were 
circumscribed by a basically old-aeon attitude to the Void. 
Crowley, perhaps by virtue of a conscious identification with 
the Draconian Current (through the mysteries of the number 
666), had intuitively grasped the possibility of an anti-Christ 
and an anti-Spirit although he could not, it seems, confront 
the idea of anti-Logos! This is evidenced by the horror with 
which he referred to the Aeon that has no Word, an aeon 
yet to come to which he ascribes the letter Zain. 13 One 
Adept only, to my knowledge, was alive to the fact that 
Crowley had not uttered a Word, because, being identified 
with the Beast he was incapable of formulating it. 14 But 
reversion to inarticulacy and bestial incapacity to utter a word 

12 See in particular the painting entitled ‘Accommodation of Desires’, repro¬ 
duced in The Secret Life of Salvador Dali, and elsewhere. 

13 See previous chapter. 

14 The adept in question was Charles Stansfeld Jones (1886-1950), known as 
Frater Achad. See Cults of the Shadow , chapter 8. 


The Light that is Not 29 

does not explain Crowley’s failure which was rooted in his 
inability to fathom the timeless dimension where the veritable 
anti-word (anti-christ) truly obtained. 15 

An examination of Dion Fortune’s version of the Cosmic 
Doctrine reveals a similar reluctance, or perhaps a genuine 
inability to insee the issue which is that the Magick of Light 
(LVX) concerns neither white nor black magic but an occult 
current that, as Austin Spare correctly assumed, vibrates in 
the spaces between-, in the interstices, so to speak, of 
spiritual spacelessness that exists in a necessarily timeless 
void behind or somewhere outside, the Tree. 

If Daath, the number of which is eleven, 16 be counted in 
with the remaining four sephiroth of the Middle Pillar, 17 the 
number 37 is obtained. This is a prime number signifying 
the full manifestation of the magical current symbolized by 
Set or Shaitan. 18 

That which was known to the Qabalists as the Tree of 
Death was in fact the other side of the Tree of Life, and the 
qliphoth were ‘demonic’ forces, the anti-powers concealed in 
the tunnels of Set that formed the interior network and 
reverse reflection of the Paths. 

The celebrated Qabalist Isaac Luria (1534-1572) composed 
the following lines which Gershom Scholem 19 describes as an 
‘exorcism of the “insolent dogs”, the powers of the other 
side’: 

The insolent dogs must remain outside and cannot come in, 

I summon the ‘Old of Days’ at evening until they are dispersed, 

Until his will destroys the ‘shells’. 

He hurls them back into their abysses, they must hide deep in their 

caverns. 2 0 

15 Frater Achad, with his formula of reversal and negation, seems to have 
come closer to the true meaning of AL than Crowley himself, for Crowley’s com¬ 
mentaries reveal a consistently positive and consequently phenomenal approach 
to its meaning. 

1 6 Daath is 11 and 20, and therefore 31, AL, th e Key Word of the Aeon of Homs. 

1710 + 9 + 6+11 + 1=37. 

l*Three, the number of Set or Saturn, multiplied by 37 yields 111 which is 
the number of Samael (Satan), Fan, and Baphomet. 

l9 The Kabbalah and its Symbolism (Routledge, 1965). 

2°‘01d of Days’, usually translated ‘Ancient of Days’, is a title of Kether. The 
‘Shells’ are the qliphoth. 



30 Nightside of Eden 

The insolent dogs are, in a very special sense, ‘the dogs of 
Reason’ (i.e. of Daath) mentioned in AL, chapter 2, verse 27. 
The ascription of the dog to the infernal realms derives from 
Egypt where the jackal or desert fox is the typical denizen of 
the Abyss, both these animals being totems of Set. The sym¬ 
bolism illuminates chapter 2, verse 19: ‘Is a God to live in a 
dog? No! but the highest are of us . . .’ Dog, which is the 
word God in reverse, indicates the Pylon of Daath through 
which the dog of reason enters the Abyss and ‘perishes’. A 
god is not to live in a dog’, but the ‘highest are of us’. The 
highest is the height represented by the eighth head of the 
Serpent that dwells in the Abyss. The ‘highest are of us’ 
implying that there are three others: the supernal or highest 
triad of the Tree, consisting of Kether, Chokmah, and Binah. 
Together with the eighth (or height) these three form eleven. 
The goddess Nuit (who is Not) proclaims in chapter 1, verse 
60: ‘My number is 11, as all their numbers who sire of us’. 
These words supply the key to the mystery of the Eight and 
the Three, or the One and the Three, 21 for the Serpent is 
One although it has eight heads. 22 Eleven is the number of 
magick, or ‘energy tending to change’, and it is at the pylon 
of Daath that this death or magical change occurs. Daath is 
the only point in the Tree that gives access to the world of 
Nuit (Not). The word ‘us’, in both verses, is qabalistically 
equal to 66 which is the ‘Mystic Number of the Qliphoth and 
of the Great Work’. 23 Here then is a key to the real meaning 
of the Qliphoth which has eluded qabalists and occultists 
alike, for few have fathomed the function of the qliphoth 
in relation to the Great Work. But when it is realized that the 
‘world of shells’ comprises the reverse side of the Tree it is 

There is a further mystery here which concerns the letter of fire - Shin. 
According to the Sefer ha-Temunah this letter in its complete form has four, not 
three, tongues. Scholem observes (ibid, page 81) ‘In our aeon this letter is not 
manifested and hence does not occur in our Torah’. Also, ‘Every negative aspect is 
connected with this missing letter’. Shin, is the triple fire-tongue, and the letter of 
Set or Shaitan, also of Chozzar the god of Atlantean Magick, and of Choronzon, 
the Beast of the Abyss. 

22 Hadit says in chapter 2, verse SO: ‘I am eight, and one in eight’. 

23 Liber D. (See The Equinox, volume I, No. 8). 


The Light that is Not 31 

possible to understand why it has been regarded as wholly evil. 

The qliphoth are not only the shells of the ‘dead’ but, 
more importantly they are the anti-forces behind the Tree 
and the negative substratum that underlies all positive life. As 
in the case of the Egyptian Book of the Dead, the title of 
which signifies its precise opposite, 24 so also the Jewish Tree 
of Death is the noumenal source of phenomenal existence. It 
is the latter that is false for the phenomenal world is the 
world of appearances, as its name implies. The noumenal 
source alone IS, because it is NOT. Once this truth is grasped 
it becomes evident that the ancient myths of evil, with their 
demonic and terrifying paraphernalia of death, hell, and the 
Devil, are distorted shadows of the Great Void (the Ain) 
which persistently haunt the human mind. These mysteries 
are explained in qabalistic terms by the number 66 which is 
the sum of the series of numbers from one to eleven. 66 is 
the number of the word LVL which means ‘to twist’ or ‘go 
round’ (the other side of the Tree). As already noted, 
humanity is ‘booked for a turn round the back of the Tree’ 
during the Aeon of Zain. This is the Aeon that will have no 
Word because it is the Aeon of the anti-logos which will be 
lived in the realm of the dog, which is a symbolic way of 
denoting the backside of the Tree. Furthermore, Zain is con¬ 
nected with the ‘twin’ symbolism of Gemini, and a sword 
denoted the woman, or cleaver in twain, as shown in the 
eighth key of the Tarot. This key contains also the formula 
of Love through polarization, for in the Aeon of Zain 
humanity will have transcended the illusions of time and 
space, having understood the noumenal basis of phenomenal 
consciousness. 

According to occult tradition man will achieve the final 
initiation by Fire before the final closing or withdrawal of 
the present Mahakalpa . 2S Sixty-six is also the number of 
DNHBH, the name of a City of Edom which is the shadow of 

24 i.e. The Book of the Ever Deathless. 

2 5 Fire = the 3-tongued flame represented by the letter Shin. According to 
Crowley ( Magical Record, p. 144) ‘Shin is the Fire of Praiaya, the “Last Judgement”.’ 




32 Nightside of Eden 

the City of the Pyramids (Binah, t?) in the Desert of Set (M?). 
Its pylon, Daath, is the shrine of that Sacred Head (the 
Eighth) which the Templars adored under the image of 
Baphomet, the God of the Eightfold Name, Octinomos. 
Crowley assumed the god-form of Baphomet as ‘Head’ of the 
O.T.O. 26 Eight plus three (the Supernal Triad) constitutes 
the Sacred Eleven: the number of those ‘who are of us’. ‘Us’ 
(66) is also the number of ALHIK which is interpreted in 
Deuteronomy, iv, 24, as ‘The Lord thy God (is a consuming 
fire)’. It can be demonstrated that this fire is the Fire Snake 
or Ophidian Current. 66 is the number of Gilgal (GLGL) ‘a 
wheel’ or ‘whorl’ and it is instructive to note that the Hindu 
tradition of the chakras, or wheels of force, confirms the 
Aegypto-Chaldean interpretation of the mysteries of Daath. 

If a diagram of the Tree of Life be superimposed upside 
down upon an upright form of it, various significant facts 
emerge. Tiphereth remains central, the pivot about which we 
have swung the inverted Tree; but instead of the White Fire 
of the Sun we now have the Black Fire of its anti-image; and 
Kether has become Malkuth as if to illustrate, literally, the 
text ‘Kether is in Malkuth and Malkuth is in Kether, but after 
a different manner’. This ‘different manner’ refers to a 
magical mode associated with the formula of the dog which, 
to my knowledge, has been indicated in one instance only — 
viz: in Liber Trigrammaton , 27 This book is desribed by 
Crowley as ‘an account of the cosmic process corresponding 
to the stanzas of Dzyan in another system’. 28 Finally, but 
most significantly, Yesod now covers Daath. Yesod is the seat 
of the sexual forces and of the densest aspect of the electro¬ 
magnetic energies of the Fire Snake. It is the abode of Shakti 
and the special place or centre of worship of the devotees of 
Shaitan (Set) among the Yezidi. 29 Daath powered by Yesod 

i6 Ordo Templi Orientis, The Order of the Temple of the East, of which 
Crowley was at one time the Grand Master. 

2 7 See The Magical & Philosophical Commentaries on The Booh of the Law. 
(Ed. Symonds and Grant; 93 Publishing, Montreal, 1974). 

28 The reference is to the system propounded by H. P. Blavatsky. 

29 See the Typhonian Trilogy (Grant/Muller, 1972-75) for a full account of this 
power-zone. 


The Light that is Not 33 

therefore becomes the energized Word, the linga in place of 
the lingua, for Daath equates with the Visuddha Chakra, as 
Yesod equates with the Muladhara . 30 The link between 
language, 31 represented by the Word ( Visuddha Chakra) and 
the linga, represented by the Muladhara, is an obvious one 
because the Logos is the form assumed by the linga when it 
utters its supreme Word. 32 

The characteristic peculiar to Daath alone is that the con¬ 
ditions of initiaion obtaining in its sphere require the total 
disintegration of the Word. In other words: The Muladhara 
meets its anti-state in Daath, and the Word remains unuttered. 
This in itself initiates the Aeon of Zayin, which is a subjective 
aeon that commences if and when an Adept leaps the voids 
behind the Tree. This is the Great Work implied by the 
formula of viparita as typified by the reversal of the Tree. 

30 The regions of the throat and genitals respectively. 

3 'More correctly, langage, in the sense of a sacred tongue. 

32 i e. at the moment of orgasm. 




4 


The Door of Death 


SCATTERED IN several of Crowley’s writings, though 
chiefly in those which he considered not to have been written 
by himself, but by extra-terrestrial Intelligences that used 
him as a channel, are hints concerning the true nature of the 
qliphoth or averse Worlds. Liber 474, for instance, is des¬ 
cribed as ‘the Gate of the Secret of the Universe’, and, as the 
number of the book suggests, it is ascribed to Daath. 1 Accord¬ 
ing to Liber 474, the universe has to be destroyed. But there 
is an important qualification for it says: ‘by the Universe We 
mean not that petty Universe which the mind of man can 
conceive, but that which is revealed to his soul in the 
Samadhi of Atmadarshan’. And again, through the Gate of 
the Secret Universe man ‘may enter into a real communion 
with those that are beyond, and he shall be competent to 
receive communication and instruction from Ourselves 
directly. Thus shall We prepare him for the Confrontation 
of Choronzon and the Ordeal of the Abyss, when we have 
received him into the City of the Pyramids’. 

The five words that I have italicized would appear to be 
singularly significant, for, having destroyed the ‘Universe’, 
what else remains? With what or with whom may the initiate 
then commune? One is reminded of the verse in AL which 
reads: ‘I am the Lord of the Double Wand of Power; the 

'DOTH = 4 + 70 + 400 = 474 (Daath). 


The Door of Death 35 

wand of the Force of Coph Nia — but my left hand is empty, 
for I have crushed an Universe; & nought remains’. This is 
the 72nd verse of the last chapter of AL, and the 217th verse 
of the Book as a whole. The two numbers, 72 and 217, indi¬ 
cate the nature of the Force mentioned. 72 is the number of 
OB, the Serpent (Aub), the negative or feminine aspect of 
Od (And) which is the Magick Light itself; it is also the 
number of the Chaldean word DBIVN, meaning ‘flux’ or 
‘drop of blood’. The word dervies from the Egyptian Typhon 
or Tefn, the Mother of Set. In the Egyptian Mysteries these 
twin powers the Ob and the Od were represented by Shu and 
Tefnut, the former signifying fire, the latter, moisture or 
blood. 2 The number 217 is that of 2. H® Seth, which is not 
only the name of the God Set, but of the seven pointed star 
of Babalon, the Scarlet Woman, the image of which is Sirius. 
217 is 31x7, thus asserting its connection with AL (31), the 
Key number of the Book of the Law. 217 is also the number 
of DBVRH, meaning ‘a bee’ which is the specific symbol of 
Sekhet, whose name means a bee. She is the goddess of 
intoxication and sexual passion, hence her connection with 
honey and with sakh, or sakti, ‘to inflame or inspire’ and 
with ‘fermented drink’. The bee, which is the copula between 
the male and female elements in flowers, was a type of the 
soul which is represented in Egyptian ideographs as the Ba 
or Aba-it, which guides the souls of the dead en route for the 
Sekhet-Aahru, the Fields of Heavenly Mead or Honey. Ba, 
the astral or double is also a word meaning ‘honey’ and Shu 
and Tefnut are said to dispense honey. 3 The goddess Sekhet 
as Sakti is a lunar force, and, together with her attributes of 
love and sweetness, a fit symbol of the honeymoon, which 
indicates the sexual nature of the force in question. 

The combination of the numbers 72 and 217 yields 289, 
the number of PTR, an ‘aperture’, ‘hole’, or Void’. The ideas 
suggested by the numbers of the verse may therefore be 
resumed by the symbol of the womb and its ophidian emana- 

2 Shu, the letter Shin (Fire) appUes to Set; Tefnut, blood, to Typhon. 

3 See Luniolatry, Ancient & Modem, by Gerald Massey. 





36 Nightside of Eden 

tions. This is confirmed by the curious word, or name, Coph 
Nia. Coph or Koph means the ‘daughter’. 4 It is a name of 
Proserpine or Persephone, the goddess of destruction. She is 
called Koph because, as Payne Knight expresses it, she 
represents the 

‘Universal daughter, or general secondary principle; for though pro¬ 
perly the goddess of Destruction, she is frequently distinguished by 
the title Soteira, Preserver, represented with ears of com upon her 
head, as the goddess of Fertility. She was, in reality, the personifi¬ 
cation of the heat or fire supposed to pervade the earth, which was 
held to be at once the cause and effect of fertility and destruction, 
as being at once the cause and effect of fermentation; from which 
both proceed’. 5 

The second part of the word or name — Nia — is the ain 
(void) in reverse, which identifies the eye or womb of the 
daughter with the Ob or Ophidian Current; a ‘double wand’ 
because Ob is the complement of Od. The ‘left hand is 
empty’, for I (the ego) have crushed an Universe & nought 
(the am) remains’. Ain is 61; Nia also is 61, but if the number 
is also reversed, 16 is obtained, and 16 is Hia (She), i.e. the 
Daughter. 6 16 is the square of 4, and, in Liber CCXXXI the 
fourth verse, which is numbered 3, 7 declares: 

The Virgin of God is enthroned upon an oyster-shell; she is like a 
pearl and seeketh Seventy to her Four. In her heart is Hadit the 
invisible glory. 

Three is gimel, the letter attributed to the Virgin Priestess 
of the Silver Star. Four is the number of the Wife; she whose 
door 8 is open. Seeking Seventy 9 to her Four means that the 
virgin seeks to open her eye or become awakened. Further 
light is shed upon the meaning of this verse by the penulti¬ 
mate verse of AL: 

4 See Ancient Art & Mythology, by Sir Richard Payne Knight, Section 117, koph. 
| Italics by present author. Cf remarks on Sekhet and the bee symbolism, supra. 
See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 8, for the significance of the daughter in 
the formula of Tetragrammaton in the present Aeon. 

7 The verses of Liber CCXXXI — as of several other of the Holy Books of 
Thelema, are numbered from nought (the am) instead of from one; hence the 
verse numbered S is in fact the fourth. 

*Daleth = 4 = a ‘door 1 . 

9 Ay in = 70 = ‘an eye’. 


The Door of Death 37 

There is a splendour in my name hidden and glorious, as the sun of 

midnight is ever the son. 

The sun-son is Hadit, the invisible glory in the heart of the 
virgin. The identity of the sun-son is emphasized by the 
reference to Khephra — the midnight sun — the sun of 
Amenta, the black sun of Set. 

‘I am’ (the ego) is identical with Daath, for ego is the 
shadow-shakti or veiling power of Kether at the lightning- 
swift moment of its bifurcation into Chokmah and Bin ah 
(Horns and Set 10 ). Daath is the ghost, the shadow of reality, 
an illusory concept that arises in human consciousness but 
which has no existence apart from it. It is known to Hindu 
metaphysics as the chit-jada-granthi — the subtle and illusory 
sense of identity that causes consciousness (chit) to imagine 
itself possessed of an individual mind and body, which, in 
reality, are inexistent, lifeless, inert (jada ). Granthi is the 
knot that binds them together in seeming identity. In 
Egyptian symbolism the mummy represents the eidolon, a 
mere doll or puppet bereft of self-consciousness except when 
animated by the khu or magical power of the Adept. For this 
reason the human body, which was taken by the Egyptians 
as the type of the mummy, was considered lifeless or illusory. 
It is this dead or inert body that is resuscitated in Amenta by 
the vivifying khu of the Adept. Identity with this phantom 
of ego-consciousness, as the mummy, is projected as a mirage 
in the Desert of Set. It has to be destroyed (i.e. forgotten), 
in consciousness, before true death is undergone at the Pylons 
of Daath. In this way only is the Universe ‘destroyed’, and 
consciousness liberated from the thraldom of imagined 
existence. Then only may ‘he (the Adept) enter into a real 
communion with those that are beyond ’. 

The situation becomes comprehensible when the true 
nature of the subconscious mind (Amenta) has been 
fathomed. The three states of consciousness — jagrat, svapna, 
and sushupti — are parallelled in Egyptian symbolism by the 


10 Represented by the planets Neptune and Saturn. 



38 Nightside of Eden 

three states of life on earth, life in Amenta, and the state of 
release from the thraldom of matter which is achieved by 
becoming one of the khus in the celestial sphere of never- 
setting 11 stars. 12 Once this parallel is grasped it is easy to 
understand the part played by Daath. Daath represents the 
ego that wrongly identifies consciousness (which it reflects 
but which it does not generate) with the body-mind complex, 
thereby ascribing to it the consciousness that pertains not to 
earth 13 or to Amenta, 14 but to formless and unconditioned 
(i.e. cosmic) consciousness. The mummy was the type of the 
body functioning in Amenta; that is to say, the earthly body 
asleep or ‘dead’ and functioning at astral levels of conscious¬ 
ness. The death of the body therefore implied the birth of 
the spirit in Amenta. But this is not the true death that 
releases the spirit for ever. To bring this about a real death 
has to be achieved, and this is the total death of the ego both 
in its personal (conscious) and in its impersonal (dreaming) 
condition. The mechanics of this process are resumed in the 
so-called Book of the Dead which is the magical manual of 
the body’s metamorphosis into a khu (glorified spirit). 

11 The never setting stars typified immortality because to the ancient Egyptians 
these stars appeared not to die (Le. set). 

12 Stan typified souls. The physical fact of never setting was later applied to 
the souls that never died (Le. they were immortal). 

13 Waking consciousness (jagrat). 

14 Dreaming consciousness (Svapna). 


5 


Beyond the Pylon of the Pit 


THE KEY to the mystery of redeeming or revivifying the 
mummy in Amenta lies in the magical use of the Fire Snake 
as taught in the arcane schools, particularly those of Asia. 1 
The key is concealed in the myth of Isis mid Osiris, and the 
search of Isis for the lost phallus of Osiris. 2 This matter is 
treated by Apuleius in his symbolic account of the Mysteries 
of Isis. Psyche, the soul, imprisoned in the underworld of 
Pluto, is rescued by Eros. These symbols can be explained in 
connection with the Tree of Life as interpreted in the light of 
the New Aeon formulae of Daath. The Supernal Wisdom 
(Daath) is represented by the ego or soul (Psyche) which 
languishes in Amenta. Kether, as Pluto, the Lord of the 
Abyss, is the outermost, and, by analogy, the innermost 
pylon of Amenta and the ultimate Gate to the Outer (Inner) 
Space where the soul is released by the Eight-Headed Serpent 
Eight represents the octave, the Octinomos or Master 
Magician, the topmost or height. The symbolism involves the 
primordial creative power represented by the seven ‘daughter’ 

1 1 have explained the Tantric aspects of this Mystery in my Typhonian Trilogy 
(q.v.). Crowley was one of the first adepts to incorporate into Western occultism 
the magical use of the sexual energies, although the African initiate, P. B. 
Randolph, operating in the United States around the turn of the present century 
was perhaps the first openly to advocate a magical use of sex. See Eulis (P. C. 
Randolph), Toledo, Ohio, 1896. 

2 For an initiated interpretation of this myth, see Aleister Crowley & the 
Hidden God, chapter 10. 




40 Nightside of Eden 

stars of Typhon in the abyss of space (Malkuth), and the 
eighth, typified by Set or Sothis at the height of heaven 
(Kether). The depth of Malkuth and the height of Kether is 
balanced by the Serpent of Daath in which the formula of 
the Fire Snake (Eros) is implicit. Thus, Kether is in Malkuth, 
and Malkuth is in Kether, but after another fashion. In 
another version of this myth, Pluto or Set is Kether and Eros 
or the Serpent is Daath, because Daath is the Garden of ODN 
(Eden), the field of electro-magnetic force which is the lair 
of the Fire Snake; and the Psyche is Malkuth. 

The symbolism involves the primal creative power rep¬ 
resented by the seven stars of Typhon in the abyss of space, 
and the eighth child - Set - at the height of heaven typified 
by the star Sirius or Sothis in which the formula of the Fire 
Snake is implicit. This symbolism, although apparently com¬ 
plex, is simple, as may be seen by equating it with the well 
known Buddhist formula: First there IS (i.e. Malkuth) - 
Form (i.e. Presence of Object). Then there is NOT (i.e. 
Kether) - Void (i.e. Presence of Subject). Then there IS (i.e. 
Ain) - Neither Form nor Void, but absence of the presence 
of both Object and Subject (i.e. the Absolute Absence, or 
Void). The first two stages of the formula comprehend the 
whole Tree and its ten cosmic power-zones. But there is one 
beyond ten (i.e. eleven; Daath) which is the gateway to the 
Ain which makes possible the transition from the Universe 
represented by the obverse of the Tree to the anti-Universe 
represented by the reverse of the Tree. The pseudo-sephira, 
Daath, is the magic mirror wherein True Being is reflected 
into ‘matter’ in the form of Existence. 3 

This concept was anciently represented by the identity of 
Satan the Opposer (and therefore the opposite or reverse) 
with Malkuth, the mundane universe as it appears in the 
waking state of consciousness. Yet even the transition from 


Being alone is real. It is the within-ness of things; the noumenon. Existence 
is unreal for, as the word implies, it comports the objectivity of Being in some 
external state, and there is none. The phenomenal universe, or F.xi«ten<v. (as a 
standing outside of subjectivity) is apparent only. 


Beyond the Pylon of the Pit 41 

the unreal universe (represented by the Tree) to the real 
universe that is NOT (represented by the back of the Tree) is 
illusory, for there is no true bridge between the two uni¬ 
verses. There is a solution of continuity, and in order to 
realize this, the height of the Abyss (the eighth star, Sothis) 
has to be attained in reverse, so that that which appears as 
the height from the front of the Tree is really the depth when 
viewed from the ‘other side’. Satan-Set is thus the key to and 
the name of the Pylon of the Pit, the guardian of which is 
‘that ancient devil Choronzon’ whose number, 333, is also 
that of Shugal, the Howler, the desert fox, the zoomorphic 
image of Sirius, the Black or Dark One, the Supreme 
Negative. 4 

In the terminology of the Typhonian Cult, Nuit or Not is 
the Absolute Negative symbolized by the Seven Stars of Ursa 
Major, the Spark-Holder or Fire Snake whose eighth child is 
Sothis, Set, or Hoor-paar-Kraat. Thus, in accordance with 
ancient symbolism where the child and the mother are 
identical, Nuit and Set represent the infinite field of possibility, 
for in Set is concealed his twin - Horus - the manifestation of 
non-manifestation which the ego (Daath) alone makes possible? 

Austin Osman Spare has shown that the Death Posture 6 is 
the key to the Gate of the Abyss, and his doctrine of the 
Neither-Neither is intimately interwoven with the ego-anti¬ 
ego complex of Daath. In that doctrine the hand symbolizes 
the Zos, or ‘body considered as a whole’, and the hand, as 
has been shown, is a magical ideograph of the Ape. It was in 
fact the name of the Kaf-Ape in ancient Egypt. 7 The ape or 
cynocephalus was the vehicle of Thoth or Daath. The other 
key-glyph of Spare’s sorcery, the Kia or Atmospheric ‘I’, is 

4 The word Shugal is the qabalistic equivalent of the word SaGaLa which is 
said by initiates to be the name of a metal out of which is made the dark or 
invisible twin star of Sirius. See Robert Temple, The Sirius Mystery, p. 24. The 
fox symbolism is also implicit. See Temple, pp. 24,48 

5 The Universe is conceptual, and no concept is possible without an ego to 
conceive it. 

6 See Images and Oracles of Austin Osman Spare, Part II, (1975). 

7 Kaf in Hebrew means the ‘palm’ (of the hand). 




42 Nightside of Eden 

the de-personalized or anti-ego symbolized by the eye. 8 A 
certain magical use of these two instruments — the Hand and 
the Eye — in waking consciousness produces the state of 
Neither Neither which was Spare’s designation for the con¬ 
ceptless or pre-conceptual state. Kia, therefore is the anti¬ 
thesis of Ra-Hoor-Khuit 9 and, as such, is identical with Set. 
The Satanic implication is contained in the paranomasic 
identity of the Eye of Set and the T of Kia. 

The number of Kia, 31, is also that of AL, the key of The 
Book of the Law, and in this sense Kia may be said to be the 
Eye of Nuit, the Ain, which is the ‘other’ or secret eye, 10 
typified by the anus of Set. The mediaeval qabalist, Pico 
della Mirandola, formulated this equation in the following 
terms: 

The letters of the name of the evil demon who is the prince of this 

world [i.e. Set, Satan] are the same as those of the name of God 11 — 

Tetragram — and he who knows how to effect their transposition 

can extract one from the other. 12 

Eliphas Levi glosses this passage with the proclamation 
Daemon est Deus inversus. In The Secret Wisdom of the 
Qabalah J. F. C. Fuller observes that ‘Satan ... is in fact the 
Tree of Life of our world, that free will which for its very 
existence depends on the clash of the positive and negative 
forces which in the moral sphere we call good and evil. Satan 
is therefore the Shekinah 13 of Assiah [the material world]. 
Fuller had previously noted with regard to Satan that: 

The God of Assiah 14 is the reversed Sammael of Yetzirah, 15 who is 

?Eye = Ayin = Ain = Nothing. 

9 Le. the individual point of view. 

10 i.e. the vulva. 

11 God ■ AL = 31; the affinity comes, as stated, via Kia, the Eye, AL, the Key to 
the 93 Current (93 is thrice 31), and Ain, the secret eye of Nuit who, as Typhon, 
was the mother or source of Set. 

12 As demonstrated. See previous note. The extract is from Kabbalistic Con¬ 
clusions, XIX, quoted in A. E. Waite: The Holy Kabbalah, Book X. 

,3 Shekinah is the Jewish equivalent of shakti, divine power. 

14 i.e. Satan. 

15 Sammael (SMAL = 131 = Pan etc) is the Guardian on the Threshold (of the 
Abyss). Yetzirah is the formative or astral world. SMAL, 131, is also the number 
of Mako (Set) the son of Typhon. 


Beyond the Pylon of the Pit 43 

the reversed Metatron of Briah, 16 who is the reversed Adam Qadmon 

of Atziluth. 1 7 In brief, Sammael in Assiah is the reversed Adam 

Qadmon three times removed; he is the ‘dark shadow of the mani¬ 
festation of the Great Androgyne of Good’. ( Qabbalah, Isaac Myer, 

P- 331). 

The number of Sammael, 131, is of great importance in 
the present Aeon. It contains the number 13 and its reverse, 
31, both of which are vital to the Ophidian Current. Note 
also that rising on the planes through the three power-zones, 
Malkuth-Yesod-Tiphareth, brings the focus of power to 
Daath, the vortex that sucks in the negative cosmic energies 
that nourish the Tree. This is typical of the ego which 
absorbs all like a sponge and then is itself dissolved in the 
void of the Abyss. 

The Dragon whose eighth head reigns in Daath is identical 
with the Beast 666. The male half is Shugal (333), the 
howler in the Desert of Set; the female half is Choronzon 
(333) or Typhon, the prototype of Babalon, the Scarlet 
Woman. One of the meanings of Goetia is ‘howling’ 18 which 
suggests that the ancient grimoires were primitive records of 
man’s attempt to rend the veil of the abyss and explore the 
other side of the Tree. The elaborate codifications of demons 
and their sigils and the rites accompanying their use parallel 
the orthodox magical workings used in connection with the 
front of the Tree. This would explain the need for secrecy 
and the frequent use of sacred names which veiled the 
sorcerer’s true intentions. 

A. E. Waite, in his introduction to The Book of Ceremonial 
Magic speaks of the more orthodox phases of magic as ‘aspects 
of the Secret Tradition insofar as it has declared itself on the 
side of God’. He then declares ‘that there is a tradition a 
reborns" 9 . He further notes: ‘As there is the height of Kether 

16 Metatron is the Angel of Briah, the Creative World. 

17 Atziluth is the World of Spirit, sometimes called the archetypal world. The 
four worlds: Assiah, Yetzirah, Briah, and Atziluth correspond to the four states of 
consciousness alluded to by the Hindus as Jagrat, Svapna, Sushupti, and Turiya. 
(See previous chapter). 

18 See The Confessions of Aleister Crowley, chapter 20. 

19 Page xxxviii. A rebours means ‘against the grain’, i.e. in reverse. 



44 Nigh tside of Eden 

in Kabalism, so there is the abyss which is below Malkuth...’. 
He does not say, however, that the abyss below Malkuth is 
accessible to man only through the Gate of Daath. But on 
page xli he writes: 

As there is a door in the soul which opens on God, so there is 

another door which opens on the recremental deeps, and there is 

no doubt that the deeps come in when it is opened effectually. 

There are also the powers of the abyss. 

It will be noticed that Waite distinguishes between the 
‘deeps’ and the ‘powers of the abyss’. 

There is a Black and a White Art ... a Science of the Height and a 

Science of the Abyss, of Metatron and Belial. 2 0 

It is my intention to show that the Height and the Depth, 
i.e. the Eighth and the Tepht 21 are identical beneath the 
image of the Beast, whose eighth Head is the Door of the 
Abyss. Waite observes, correctly, that Typhon, Juggernaut, 2 2 
and Hecate 23 were not less divine than the gods of the over¬ 
world.’ 24 He contrasts the over-world with the underworld, 
or, as we might say, the fore-front of the Tree with its under¬ 
side. 

It is significant that the embodiment of human conscious¬ 
ness, i.e. man, is, in Hebrew, ‘Adam’, meaning ‘red earth’ or 
‘clay’, a symbol of blood congealed as flesh. The word Adam 
derives from the Egyptian A turn or Turn, the setting sun, the 
blood-red dying sun sinking into Amenta, the hidden land 
(hdl). In the earliest traditions (i.e. the Draconian), before 
equinoctial time had been established, the North, not the 
West, was the place of darkness; the left, the underside; even 
as the South was the earlier East, as the front or place of 
rising. 25 Daath, primarilly the north, later became identified 
with the Western Pylon and the bourne of man’s sojourn. 

20 The Book of Ceremonial Magic, p. 5. 

21 Tophet; the Depth. 

“Yog-Nuit. Cf. Yog-Sothoth. 

23 Ur-Hekau, the thigh emblem of the Great Magic Power (shakti), known to 
the Egyptians as the ‘Mighty One of Enchantments’. See The Book of the Dead. 

24 The Book of Ceremonial Magic, p. 14. 

2s i.e. of the sun in the macrocosm and the phallus in the microcosm. 


Beyond the Pylon of the Pit 45 

From the moment of its incarnation, human consciousness 
begins its journey to Amenta. Thus, the beginning is in 
Malkuth (earth); the end is in Daath (air or space). 

The Beast and the Woman conjoined is the formula of the 
androgynous Baphomet which was represented by the head 
of an ass. This creature was a Typhonian symbol of the back¬ 
ward way, passage, or tunnel, an appropriate glyph of the 
Abyss, the gateway to which was Daath( Death). The symbol 
of the qliphoth of Yesod is known as the ‘obscene ass’, 
which, in turn is symbolic of astral consciousness typified by 
water (blood), the element attributed to the Scarlet Woman. 
Daath, as Supernal Wisdom, corresponds to the element fire, 
for it is the creative aspect of ego that generates images in the 
blood of Yesod prior to reification in the flesh of Malkuth. 

The five cosmic power-zones of the Middle Pillar corres¬ 
pond to the five elements: Earth (Malkuth), Water (Yesod), 
Fire (Tiphereth) Air (Daath), and Spirit (Kether). The 
dissolution of the ego in Amenta has to be accomplished 
before the ‘resurrection’ or exaltation to heaven of the 
Spirit, represented by Kether. The five elements correspond 
to the five states of consciousness mentioned by the Hindus: 
Jagrat (waking consciousness), Malkuth, Earth; Svapna (astral 
or dreaming consciousness), Yesod, Water; Sushupti (void 
consciousness), Tiphereth, Air; Tuny a (transcendent con¬ 
sciousness), Daath, Death, Fire; and Turiyatita (Neither 
Neither state of Kia), Kether, Spirit. 26 

Malkuth (earth) is the menstrum of reification; Yesod 
(water), the menstrum of reflection or the doubling of the 
image 27 via the blood of the moon; Tiphereth (air), the 
menstrum of aspiration by the light of solar consciousness; 
Daath (fire), the menstrum of vibration, the Place of the 
Twin Logoi or Word that is both true and false, uttered and 
unuttered; and Kether (spirit), the menstrum of Non-being 

26 It will be noticed that in the previous series of attributions Air, not Fire is 
attributed to Daath. This is because Daath as the Gate of the Void = Space (Air), 
whereas Daath as Death = Dissolution (Fire). 

2 7 i.e. reproduction at astral levels. 




46 Nightside of Eden 

that transmits the Pure Negativity of the Ain. 

The total numeration of the Sephiroth of the Middle Pillar, 
including Daath, is 37, which represents Unity itself in its 
balanced trinitarian manifestation. 2 8 37 is also the word 
LHB, meaning the ‘flame’, ‘head’, or ‘point’, which resumes 
the doctrine of the Head (in Daath) as the point of access to 
the universe of Pure Negation. Also, 37 is the number of 
LVA which means ‘Non’, ‘Neque’, ‘Nondum’, ‘Absque’, 
‘Nemo’, ‘Nihil’; not, neither, not yet, without, none, nothing. 

As previously noted, the number 333, the half of the Beast 
in front (Shugal-Set) added to 333, the half behind (Choron- 
zon) appears as the Beast 666. When 333 is subtracted from 
the number 365, 29 32 remains. This is the number of total 
manifestation; things as they are in their totality and finality, 
as represented by the whole Tree: the ten sephiroth and 
twenty-two paths. Most important of all, however, 32 is the 
number of IChID, the ego, self, or soul. The word Ichid 
derives from the Egyptian Akhet, the spirit, the manes, the 
dead, which highlights the precise nature of the ego as an 
upadhi — an illusory entity masquerading as Being. And this 
upadhi is the sole gateway to the realm of pure Non-Being, 
from whence all phenomena proceed. The Beast 666 then 
represents the Dweller at the Gate of the Abyss, and its two 
aspects — Shugal (333) and Choronzon (333), together 
resume the 32 kalas 30 — which are the keys to the Mystery 
of Wholeness, Holiness, Totality, represented by the Tree of 
Life and the Tree of Death. 31 

In The Natural Genesis (vol. I. p. 137) Massey declares: 

It may be affirmed, generally, that all veritable beginnings in typo¬ 
logy, mythology, numbers and language, can be traced to the opening 
of a Oneness which divides and becomes dual in its manifestation. 
This applies also to the metaphysics of ‘Creation’. In 
28 111 divided by 3. 

2 9 The complete cycle of manifestation as typified by the circle of360 degrees, 
plus the 5 ‘forbidden’ days. See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 4. 

30 Sixteen each = 32. 

31 333 + 32 = 365. The number 365 and the 16 kalas have been explained in 
detail in Cults of the Shadow, chapter 4. 


Beyond the Pylon of the Pit 47 

Egyptian, the place of opening is the Teph or Tepht. The 
Hebrew Tophet derives from the Egyptian Tepht as the ‘pit’, 
‘hell’, the ‘abyss’. The letter *T’ was an earlier form of the 
letter ‘D’, and when the latter replaces the initial letter of the 
word Tepht, we get Depth. As Daath, this is the primal 
opening on to the Abyss behind the Tree. Massey further 
declares that ‘the earliest ascertainable human thought was 
related to opening' in the sense that the mother opened, 
and one thereby became two. The metaphysical parallel is 
also true, for human thought was a conceptualizing of 
energies issuing from the opening of Daath as a crack in 
space, so to speak, through which the forces of Non-being 
seeped and became, in the process, conceptual thought. Thus 
the ego flowered, and its root was in the abyss. The word 
ego 32 totals 78, which is the number oiMezla, the influence 
from Kether. This influence did not flow directly into 
Tiphereth (the seat of human consciousness), it came via the 
Tunnel of Set behind Daath through which it passed — as 
light through a prism — to be broken up into conceptual 
thought; hence its illusory nature. ‘In the act of opening, 
things became dual’ — Massey expressed the matter thus in 
relation to physical phenomena; the same is also true of 
metaphysical phenomena. A passage in the Bundahish 
expresses the situation in these terms: 

The region of Light is the place of Ahura-Mazda, which they call 

endless Light, and his omniscience is in vision or revelation. 

On the other hand: Aharman ‘in Darkness, with backward 
understanding and desire for destruction was in the abyss, 
and it is he who will not be, and the place of that destruction, 
and also of that Darkness, is what they call the endlessly 
dark’. 33 

3 2 By Cabala Simplex, Ego = 25, which is the number of The Beast, ChIVA, as 
5 x 5, the source or womb of life. I am indebted to Soror Tanith for pointing out 
to me that ShlVA is a metathesis of AIVASh, thus identifying the Beast with the 
egoidal prism through which the extraterrestrial forces flow into being from the 
voids of Space (non-being). 

33 Quoted by Massey in The Natural Genesis, vol. I, page 147 from The 
Bundahish, chapter I, verses 2 and 3. (trans. West.) 



48 Nightside of Eden 

The number of ego, 78, is also a number of AIVAS, the 
transmitter of AL from an extraterrestrial dimension. This 
dimension is within, not without, and the message of Aiwass 
proceeded from the Abyss of Non-being. This negative cur¬ 
rent, on passing through the prism of the ego, 34 assumed 
those aspects with which students of the subject are familiar: 
‘Aiwass is called the minister of Hoor-paar-Kraat, the God of 
Silence; for his word is the Speech of the Silence’. 3s In other 
words, 78 (ego) is the Logos, the manifest utterance of the 
Unmanifest. This vibration (Word), in the process of 
becoming manifest is inevitably falsified, because in order 
that it may be formulated, Nothing (Nuit) must appear to 
become Something (Hadit). The realm of the word — in the 
microcosm — is the Visuddha chakra which is attributed to 
Daath. Its element, air, is the menstrum of vibration, the 
means whereby silence manifests in sound. In magical terms 
Daath as air is the means whereby Hoor-paar-Kraat manifests 
as Ra-Hoor-Khuit. The noumenal becomes phenomenal at the 
chit-jada-granthi 36 or Daath-centre which typifies the ego, 
the seeming source of all phenomena. 

Also, 78 is the number of Enoch (ChNK), meaning ‘to 
initiate’. Enoch was the source of the Calls or Keys used by 
Dee and Kelly in their traffic with extraterrestrial entities. It 
is in fact to Dee that we owe the first account of Choronzon, 
the Guardian of the Abyss. 37 Furthermore, 78 is the number 
of MBVL, ‘a flood’ and therefore the flood. The word derives 
from the Egyptian mehber , 38 which contains the actual name 
of the abyss. Finally, 78 is the number of cards comprising 
the Tarot pack and, as such, it resumes all possible occult 
formulae. 

3 4 In this case, Aleister Crowley. 

3s Magical & Philosphicai Commentaries on The Book of the Law, p. 94. 

36 A Sanskrit term denoting the subtle knot or centre at which sentience 
identifies itself with insentience and thus appears to create an autonomous 
entity or conscious subject having the ‘worid’ as its object. 

3 7 Dr. John Dee, 1527-1608: ‘There is a Mightye Daemon, The Mightye Choron¬ 
zon, who serveth to guard the Great Doors of the Unknown Universe. Know Him 
Well and Be Ware’. 

3 *Meh, ‘the abyss of waters’; ber, later bel, to ‘well forth’, ‘to belly out’, 
‘be ebullient’. 


Beyond the Pylon of the Pit 49 

To sum up, Daath is the primal opening, the source of the 
conceptual universe, i.e. the ego; hence its allegedly satanic 
and deceptive nature. The formula of its resolution is the for¬ 
mula of initiation into the Real, i.e. the anti-universe or 
world of non-being, the negative, the Ain. 

It has been already noted that Ain, phenomenal void, is, 
in reverse, the Nia. This word, which is common to many 
African dialects, denotes the negative, no, not. It was rep¬ 
resented in Egypt by the goddess Nuit. Its hieroglyphic 
determinative is the menstruating woman. The ain (eye) as 
nia, is the eye reversed; not the eye of the light, but the eye 
of the dark, the occult eye, the vulva in its negative phase, 
the witch-moon of blood, the lunar eclipse. 

The Two Waters or Floods described in the Bundahish are 
said to flow from the North. This is the place of Daath, the 
source of the second deluge, the first flowing from the Ain, 
yet further north. Dion Fortune points out that in the ear¬ 
liest traditions the North was considered as the place of 
greatest darkness. As the female was the first to open and 
divide into two, so darkness preceded light in the sense that 
it was the noumenal, the negative state of being, from which 
existence, the positive state, issued forth. Daath is the gate¬ 
way to the primal darkness in the north. Conversely it is 
also the manifestor of existence, represented by the south. 
Set is Matter; Nuit is Spirit. The North or back of the Tree 
with its network of tunnels appears in the South as the front 
of the Tree in the form of the power-zones and paths. As the 
Mother-Darkness was primal and represented the back of the 
Tree, so the Left Hand as the feminine or infernal hand, was 
also the first. There is a rabbinical tradition which maintains 
that ‘all things came out of the He’. He is the number 5, 
which is the glyph of Wdman typified by her negative phase; 
it is also the equivalent of one hand (five fingers), the hand 
itself being typical of fashioning, moulding, creating. Its 
ideograph was the Kaf-ape or cynocephalus, the special 
vehicle of the god Thoth (the moon), thus indicating the 
lunar nature of this fashioning. Woman produces the blood 
from which the flesh is fashioned. The Left Hand thus 



50 


Nightside of Eden 

equates with the ape symbolism. In the ancient Egyptian 
mysteries the ape was a type of the transforming dead, that 
is to say of birth into the spirit world. The esoteric meaning 
is that, in the night of death (Daath), the ego is dissolved, 
sloughs its illusory existence and achieves real being which 
is non-ego, non-being. 


6 


7 yphonian Teratomas 


THE EARLIEST Mystery Tradition (i.e. the African) was 
dominated by three key symbols: the Tree, the Water, and 
the Serpent. These are three supreme types of deity with 
several primordial races, and they are resumed in the meta¬ 
physics of the qabalah as the Tree of Life, the Water of the 
Abyss, and the Serpent that achieved its apotheosis, or height, 
in the depth to which the Gateway is Daath. 

In several of Crowley’s writings there appears the phrase 
the ‘Wrong of the Beginning’. 1 The beginning was with the 
Abyss which deluged its waters into two streams, that of life 
and that of death, or, more correctly, that of existence 
(illusion) and that of being (reality). The positive stream is 
considered to be real, and the negative stream unreal, whereas 
the opposite is true as will be shown in due course. 

In the sphere of physical phenomena the positive stream of 
the life-wave became embodied in flesh, and the ‘sons of God’ 
were seduced. The matter is expressed in biblical terms by 
the phrase ‘the sons, of God came in unto the daughters of 
men, and they bare children to them . . .’ 2 From their 
copulations emerged Typhonian teratomas such as those 
described by Berosus in his account of creation. 3 Of these 

1 See, for instance, Liber LXV, chapter IV, verse 56. This Book has been 
reprinted with a Comment in the Magazine Sothis, Vol. L No. V. 

2 Genesis, VI, 4. 

3 See Magical Creation, by Kenneth Grant, Carfax Monograph No. IX. 





52 Nightside of Eden 

teratomas the dragon and the ape were the archetypes. 
Dragons 4 died out, but the ape yet survives as the symbol of 
the degradation of the gods in their traffic with embodied 
life-force. The matter features prominently in ancient writings 
such as the Book of Enoch, the Sumerian Gilgamesh Epic, 
the Zend Avesta, the Bundahish, the Vedas, and in the more 
ancient Book of Dzyan. 

According to the secret doctrine these beasts are the out¬ 
come of pre-human magical experiments by extra-terrestrials 
who copulated with primitive women. The fact that such 
congress also occurred between the higher simia and the 
lower human was mentioned by P. B. Randolph as proof of 
the possibility of such interbreeding, in support of which 
he cites ‘The tailed “men” of Namaqua Land; the dwarf 
peoples of gorilla-land, and the offspring of Hottentot women 
captured and impregnated by the giant apes of Nigritia’. 5 

But the ‘Wrong of the the Beginning’ appertained to coup¬ 
lings vastly earlier than those mentioned by Randolph. One 
of the reasons of the abhorrence in which the Left Hand Path 
has been held through aeons of time to the present day is due 
to the kind of cosmic miscegenation implied by the intrusion 
of influences from the back, left, or infernal side, of the Tree, 
with its consequent perichoresis of non-being into the realm 
of manifest existence. A misunderstanding of the function 
of Daath and of the nature of Choronzon (the Gate of the 
Abyss) has been the cause of this misinterpretation. The Left 
Hand Path is prior to that of the right in the sense, and in 
this sense only, that the Left is the first (the Ain) which is 
symbolic of true being (i.e. non-being) as distinct from 
apparent or phenomenal existence, which, as the word 
implies ‘exists outside ’. That which is noumenal (i.e. within) 
is prior to that which is without (i.e. phenomenal). There is 
no objective reality, but there is the manifestation of non- 

4 The symbol of the Dragon of the Deep, of which Dagon (777) is the type, 
may have been deposited in mythology by actual encounters on earth between 
amphibious extraterrestrials and primitive humanity. See Temple, The Sirius 
Mystery, Sidgwick & Jackson, 1976. 

s Eutis by P. B. Randolph (Toledo, Ohio, 1896.) p. 173. 


Typhonian Teratomas 53 

manifestation; the shadow of being that is cast by non-being. 
This current, when applied to the physiology of incarnation, 
produces the Typhonic teratomas which became the types of 
the Qliphoth as symbolic of the influences emanating from 
the ‘other world’; in the terminology of qabalistic meta¬ 
physics, the other side of the Tree. 

Choronzon manifests as the Scarlet Woman, a form of 
Babalon 6 as the first opening or gateway, the beginning 
represented by blood, the scarlet fluid of incarnation. Babal 
or Bab-el means the ‘Gate of God’, and, as such, is equated 
with the Northern gate of Eden (heaven) interpreted qabalis- 
tically as Daath. AL or EL is 31, the key number of the New 
Aeon, as fully explained in the Trilogy. 

Berosus and other ancient authorities have preserved 
records of the monstrous creatures that swarmed into 
creation and which were reflected into mythology as the 
‘giants’. 7 The generic name for them is Oza, 78, a number of 
Aiwass and of the influence from Kether ( Mezla ). The Oz 
is the entity that casts its monstrous and ape-like shadow 
over The Magician in Crowley’s design of the Tarot Pack. 8 
The ego, 78, as the ‘ape’ of the Self fulfils a similar function to 
that of the cynocephalus in relation to the Moon god, Thoth. 
The ape, kaf, was the hand of Thoth, the executor of the 
god’s decrees, as the ego is the executive of the Self (true 
Being) in the world of illusion (i.e. the lunar universe). The 
Hand and the Eye are combined in the symbolism of Daath 
as the Ape of Thoth, the Phallus of Set, and the Eye of 
Typhon (Babalon), the Ain of the Abyss. 

The Veil of the Abyss that separates the supernal triad, 
Kether-Chokmah-Binah, from the solar centre, Tiphereth, is 
balanced by the Veil of Paroketh which divides that centre 


6 The orthography Babalon, as distinct from Babylon, originated in The Book 
of the Law. See the Comments on AL , for a full explanation. 

7 Mentioned in Genesis. 

* Atu II, ascribed to Mercury and hence to the Ape of Thoth. See The Book of 
Thoth by Aleister Crowley. 




54 Nightside of Eden 

from the lunar and sublunary 9 worlds. The world of emana¬ 
tions of the Ain comprises the supernal power-zones. The 
solar or creative world is characterized by the middle segment 
of the Tree, and the world of formation 10 is represented by 
the Yesodian centre below the Veil of Paroketh. The Double 
Veil conceals a mystery of the Qabalah no less important 
than that of the Double Horizon and the Mystery of the 
Lord of the Wand of Double Power in the Egyptian Tradition. 
In Jewish mysticism, Paroketh or Parakah was the veil that 
divided the Temple. Its number, 305, is that of Yetzirah, the 
World of Formation, and as the Veil of the Abyss divides the 
World of Emanations from the World of Creation, so the Veil 
of Paroketh divides the World of Creation from the World of 
Formation. The Veil of the Abyss conceals Daath; the Veil 
of Paroketh obscures Yesod, and these two power zones 
generate the glamour and illusion that constitute the world 
of appearances. 

The veil divides. In the macrocosm the horizon divides the 
year, and the sign of division has been deposited in the 
astrological sign of which shows the sun rising or setting 
on the double horizon and dividing the circle of the year into 
summer and winter, as sunrise and sunset divide the round of 
the day into light and dark. In the microcosm the veil 
divides the maid from the woman. It is in the physiological 
sense that the serpent is identified with the veil of the division 
of one whole. 11 The hole or Tepht of the Snake 12 is com¬ 
posed of two halves; the negative or latent potentiality of the 
Maiden, and the positive or patent power of the Woman. 
Thus the Serpent, the Tree, 13 and the Abyss 14 are resumed 
in the eleventh sephira, Daath. Its northerly position on the 

The sublunary worlds are the astral, the etheric, and the qliphotic. They are 
specifically related to the Yesodic and Malkuthian power-zones. 

1 °i.e. the astral world. 

11 The total cycle represented by the 10 sephiroth. 

12 i.e. the Abyss. 

i3 The 10 sephiroth or total cycle of the manifest and the unmanifest; one 
each side of the veil. 

14 The emaning source of both. 


Typhonian Teratomas 55 

Tree balances the ninth sephira, 1 s which is the southern 
manifestation of the ain, via the double wanded One (11), 
Daath. This qabalistic equation expresses the interrelationship 
between Nuit (Typhon) and Hadit (Set) in terms of the dual 
polarity of manifestation. 

The formula of IHVH 16 is implicit in this symbolism, for, 
according to rabbinical lore Jehovah denotes a divided 
entity, half serpent, half woman. Ihuh is Chawah or Eve. One 
Jewish tradition has it that Eve commenced menstruating on 
a Tuesday, at which time she transformed into a serpent. In 
the Indian tradition, Tuesday is sacred to Kali, the goddess 
of.Time 17 and of Blood. One of her glyphs is the Dragon of 
the Deep. In the Western Arcane tradition, Tuesday is 
ascribed to Mars who is preeminently the deity of bloodshed, 
not - primarily — of battle, but of sexuality. 18 Mars rep¬ 
resented the cleaver, and the blood which flowed from the 
mother-cleft was the earliest type of Mars as the mystical 
energy of the goddess. This enables us to interpret the 
symbol of the sword and of the verse in AL which reads: 

Let the woman be girt with a sword before me: let blood flow to 

my name. 19 

Ra-Hoor-Khuit, the child, is speaking; his manifestation is 
dependent upon the cleavage into two 20 characteristic of 
the formula of creation. There is also a deeper implication. 
In Hebrew the word for sword, zain, is attributed to the 
Twins, Set-Horus. Zain is the number seven, the number of 
Sevekh, the earlier form of Set as the son of the Mother 
(Typhon), one of whose symbols was the crocodile, the 
water-snake or dragon of the deep. Like the progeny of 

15 The power-zone Yesod, ascribed to Teth, i.e. Set. 

16 Tetragrammaton. See The Magical Revival for an initiated interpretation of 
this formula. 

1 7 Kali also divides, for she cuts Time into kalas\ periods. 

18 See Aleister Crowley & the Hidden God, chapter 4, note 20. 

19 AL. Ill, 11. Note the number of the verse, eleven, the number of Daath and 
of magick, i.e. ‘energy tending to change’. 

20 Two’s-day, hence Eve’s manifestation on that day typifies the formula of 
creation. 





56 Nightside of Eden 

Tiamat, 21 Sevekh assumed his mother’s totem, the crocodile. 
According to one tradition he was the seventh son, and, 
together with his mother, the eighth power; the power that 
represented the height or summit. He was in fact the fulfil¬ 
ment of his mother. In this role, the mother and her male 
child (Set) were given a permanent place in the planisphere, 
where they occupy the central position at the summit or 
pole. 22 

The Mother and Child constituted the Dragon with 8 heads 
that forms the subject of the Golden Dawn Ritual. 23 Seven 
of the heads can be identified with the seven planets, and the 
seven inferior sephiroth of the Tree of Life, the seven that 
have their summit or height in Daath. 

The Veil that conceals the Dragon of the Abyss divides the 
triad of the Supernals, the vehicle of the ^4m, 24 from the 
inferior seven power-zones which are vehicles of the zain, the 
dual power of the twins — Set-Horns — negative and positive, 
Hoor-paar-Kraat and Ra-Hoor-Khuit. Furthermore, the sword 
is a symbol of the dove whose glyph is the yoni, and, as 
Massey observes, they ‘both unite in one image under one 
name’ 2S because of their origin in the Great Magic Poweror 
Secret Eye. One of the symbols of this power combines in 
one image both the sword and the tail of the dove. The dove 
was an image of Typhon long ages before it was associated 
with the virgin or ‘veiled one’ of later traditions. It is the 
Typhonian dove that is depicted diving into the chalice on 
the great seal of the Ordo Templi Orientis. The chalice bears 
the sign of the cross which also is pre-Christian as the sign of 
the X, the ten or total. One form of the total is the tenfold 
cross of the Tree of Life. But it is the eleven-fold cross which 
Crowley, as a Gnostic, identified with the Octinomos or 

21 The ‘Mother of Time’ in the Berosian account of creation. 

22 See the Zodiac of Denderah. 

23 See frontispiece to this book. 

24 Kether-Chokmah-Binah. This triad dominates all and corresponds to the 
letters Aleph, Beth, Gimel which, by analogy, comprise the whole world. 

2s Z-ain- 

26 The Great Magic Power ( Ur-Hekau) typifies the faculty of clairvoyant 
vision, which the ancients represented by the glyph of the Eye. 


Typhonian Teratomas 57 

eightfold name, BAPHOMET, the ancient Head adored of 
the Templars. Daath is the eleventh power-zone, and the 
elevenfold cross denotes the Crossing of the Abyss, though 
not — as Crowley supposed — in the sense in which that event 
is described in One Star in Sight, 21 but rather in the sense of 
a crossing over from one side of the Tree to the ‘other side’ 
— viz: the Tree of Death. This is confirmed by the name 
itself, for the root of Baphomet is Mete, 28 ‘one and seven’, 
i.e. the eighth (Set), with all the wealth of symbolism implied 
by the formula of Hoor-paar-Kraat, the Hidden God. 

Further corroboration of this reading may be found in the 
allusion to the ‘dogs of reason’ associated with Daath, the 
Sphere of the Ruach which later traditions metaphysicalized 
and appropriated to the faculty of reason. Later, that is, in 
the sense that the ‘dove of Mary’ is the metaphysicalized 
version of a symbol which can be traced to the Great Magic 
Power resumed under the glyph of the Ain and the Zain: the 
seven and the one. 29 TheiZw (later Lu) was the emaner as the 
Ain, or secret eye. Due to fusion of two levels of language the 
Ru and Lu became identical. They deposited the word 
hriliu, a Gnostic term which Crowley restored and incor¬ 
porated in his Gnostic Mass. 30 He defined hriliu as the 
‘metaphysical ecstasy’, i.e. the ecstasy beyond the physical, 
and therefore beyond the manifest. The Hebrew word ruach 
is derived from Ru, meaning a ‘yoni’ or ‘wheel’ whose 
revolving, spiralling or whirling motion identified it with 
spirit. In the Book of the Dead the ruach appears as Ru-hak 
which according to the primitive gnosis denotes the mouth 
or vulva of Hak. 31 Massey notes that Ru-Hak was ‘a deluding 
snake .. . the reptile which makes use of this magic power 
(hak) to draw the victim towards his mouth’. 32 The point of 

2 7 See Magick p. 327. et seq. 

28 The Natural Genesisi II, 14. 

29 Zain = 7; ain is our word ‘one’ derived originally from the None that was 
first, and therefore one as the prime concept. 

30 S eeMagick, p. 423 et seq. 

31 The magic power; cf. Ur-Hekau, Hekt, Hecate, Hexe, Hag, as the witch or 
wielder of glamour or illusion. 

3 2 Italics by present author. 



58 Nightside of Eden 

importance is that the word ‘mouth’, when not interpreted 
according to the primitive or physiological gnosis, denotes 
Daath as the outlet or uterus that utters the Word or logos. 
The mystical counterpart of this activity is the Visuddha 
chakra 33 which is associated with the power-zone at the base 
of the cerebellum, the seat of the reproductive energies. To 
this zone the qabalists attributed the letter qoph 34 

The word Hak is an earlier form of Hag, Hexe, Witch. 
Hekau in Egyptian signifies ‘magic’, or ‘to charm’; it also 
means ‘beer’, which contains the result of fermentation, viz: 
alcoholic spirits. Massey cites also the Chinese word Hak, a 
name for ‘distilling spirits’, which, as he observes, is ‘also a 
mode of magic’ because the intoxication, resulting from Hak, 
opens the gate of the spirit world and facilitates astral vision. 
And so, in the Book of the Dead there appears the exhor¬ 
tation: ‘Go back Ruhak! fascinating or striking cold with the 
eyes’ (ch.Cl.) The symbolism of the eye has already been 
explained, but the epithet ‘cold’, apart from its obvious con¬ 
nection with the blood of the reptile and the paralysis 
induced by its glance, also suggests the ‘icy realms of nothing¬ 
ness’ 35 which characterize the ‘other’ Universe, Universe 
‘B’, and the ‘cold waste of Kadath’ which H. P. Lovecraft 
associated with influences from ‘outside’, that is the other 
side of the Tree. 

The qoph 36 symbolism is also relevant. Qoph is a develop¬ 
ment, one might almost say a refinement of the idea of Kaph, 
the eleventh letter of the ancient alphabets, the letter which 
identifies the kaf-monkey (cynocephalus) that apes or 
reflects the Word through the mechanism of sexual repro¬ 
duction. The ape was a symbol of earlier magical experiments 
involving the use of the Ophidian Current in connection with 
the energies symbolized by qoph, which means the ‘back of 
the head’. The head is Resh, the Hebrew letter ‘R’ (later ‘L’). 

3 3 The throat centre. Note that to it the Hindus ascribe a lotus having 16 
petals. 

34 See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 1. 

3 S MSR. Grade Papers. Student I Degree, by Michael Bertiaux. 

36 Qoph may be considered as a metaphysicalized Kaph. 


Typhonian Teratomas 59 

We are back again at th ehriliu or metaphysical ecstasy induced 
by passing through the Gate of the Abyss into a realm that is 
not only beyond matter, but which is positively anti-matter. 
The head as the resh is the sun (Tiphereth), and the back of the 
head as the qoph, is the moon represented by Yesod on the 
Tree. Sun and Moon, Resh and Qoph ; these concepts when 
blended are an expression of Spirit: Resh (200) + Qoph (100) = 
Shin (300). Shin is the triadic form of the One, ^4in, or Yoni, 
that is None. The letter shin derived from the ideographic form 
of the Beast as the thigh of Pasht the lioness, the great cat Bast, 
the cut or cleft. The sexual nature of the cut or division has 
been continued in The Book of the Law 31 Massey claims that 
the thigh, symbolic of Great Magic Power, hekau, ‘became the 
letter Sin (Shin)’ 33 According to AL: ‘The word of Sin is Res¬ 
triction’. 39 Because of its identity with the feminine divider in 
twain, the Shin became a symbol of the Spirit in its negative or 
non-manifesting phase. Pesh, Peh, or Pasht, supplied the type of 
the feminine thigh or magic power of the hekt, hecate, witch, 
or wise woman associated with the oracle of periodic time, 
and, at a later stage the peh or thigh-symbol of the Aeon, or 
end of a period of time.* 0 Sin as restriction in the moral 
sphere is related to the ‘five black or negative days of the 
intercalary period of the Epagomenae’. Massey cites an 
Australian myth in which ‘the snake is said to sever the Tree 
of Life, so that it could walk off in human fashion as the 
male and female’. In this the Snake is the divider because it 
was a type of menstruation. This is the ‘division hither home¬ 
ward’ as implying the path of return to non-manifestation. 
This type of the ending of an aeon, and therefore of restric¬ 
tion in the sense of termination, is sometimes represented by 

3 1 AL. I. 29: ‘For I am divided for love’s sake, for the chance of union’. Also, 
AL. III. 2: ‘There is division hither homeward . . 

38 ‘- so The Egyptian ideograph of the haunch or thigh that became the later 
Hebrew letter (Shin) ascribed to Spirit. 

39 AL. II, 41. 

40 The letter Shin is attributed, in the old Tarot pack, to the Trump entitled 
The Angel of the Last Judgment; it typifies Destruction by Fire and is now 
applied to the New Aeon symbolism where the Trump is entitled The Aeon. See 
The Book of Thoth. 





60 Nightside of Eden 

the lizard which is another form of the serpent. Its name, 
Tzab has the value of 93 which equates it qabalistically with 
the specifically Thelemic manifestation of the Ophidian 
Current. Its cognate glyph is Nakaka (also 93), the name of 
the Serpent of the Dark, the night of Nuit that can manifest 
only by virtue of the Har (Horns), the child that is the result of 
love (agape, 93), under will ( thelema, 93). The child is the 
divider of the Mother-Darkness (Nuit); it is his fire 41 that 
reveals her, as the lightning flash illumines the nightsky. Thus 
it is said: ‘Had! the manifestation of Nuit’. 42 

On page 56 the seven heads of the dragon were identified 
with the seven planets and the seven inferior power-zones of 
the Tree of Life. Before we attempt to trace this identifica¬ 
tion it is necessary to understand that in the earliest magical 
mythologies, such as the Egyptian, the primal power-zones 
were concentrated in the 8 gods that ruled in Am-Smen, the 
Place of Chaos. 43 These eight primary powers were later 
demoted and identified with the lesser cosmic power-zones: 
The Sun, Jupiter, Earth, Moon, Mars, Mercury, and Venus. 
These powers were identified with the basal pyr ami d of the 
Tree of Life which culminated in the summit or height, the 
eighth power-zone typified by Daath, the place of Choronzon 
or Chaos in the Abyss. 44 Am-Smen was also known as the 
place of purgation and preparation, which it is by virtue 
of its association with the Babalonic aspect of Choronzon as 
previously explained. The Smen, semen, or seed, was origin¬ 
ally the fructifying blood regarded as feminine before the 
creative spirit was ascribed to masculinity. 

In the Sumerian phase of mythology, the seven heads of 
the devouring dragon 45 were represented as follows: 

The first by a Scorpion 

\\ Har not onl y means chdd > but also fire-, it is the root of Hal or Hellfire. 

42 Note that one meaning of the word Nuit is Not. 

43 Crowley equates Chaos with Therion (the Beast). See Magick, Liber XXV 
and compare same with chapter 25 of The Book of Lies. 

44 The fourfold base and the triangular or threefold elevation. 

4S i.e. Apophis. See ideogram depicting the eight - not seven - loops, thus 
subsuming the 8 primary power-zones and the 16 kalas. Page 137. 


Typhonian Teratomas 61 

The second by a Whirling Cross or Thunderbolt 4 6 

The third by a Leopard or Hyena 

The fourth by a Serpent 

The fifth by a Raging Lion 

The sixth by a Rebellious Giant 

The seventh by Typhon, Angel of the Fatal Wind. 

Although we cannot expect a perfect concordance of 
symbolism, these seven types equate almost precisely with 
the powers of the planets listed above. For in its earliest 
mythological phase the Sun was identified, not with heaven 
but with hell and with the fiery sting of the scorpion; which 
is why, in the primal myths, the sun is not celebrated and 
blessed for its lifegiving rays, but cursed and abhorred for its 
blasting heat. It was after the myth-makers had left their 
earliest home 47 that the sun began gradually to assume the 
beneficent role which it played in later mythologies. 

The fire of hell was based upon direct experience of the 
Har as the son-sun of heaven, the har or hell caused by the 
elemental phenomenon of withering heat. In later times, the 
Har or Honrs became the glorious creative god typified by 
the solar hawk. Yet the primordial conception persisted into 
the later phases of Egyptian thought when elemental black¬ 
ness (the blackness of scorching heat) had been meta- 
physicalized into moral evil, for the Egyptians maintained 
that all evil emanated from the place of sunrise, while all 
good and healing forces radiated from the land in the West. 48 
Massey has demonstrated by a comparative list of names that 
in 36 African languages the name for hell is the same as for 
fire, which in turn is frequently synonymous with the sun. 
Albert Churchward also makes this point. 49 

To Jupiter is ascribed the thunderbolt or whirling swastika. 
The Leopard and Hyena are types of transformation. The 
latter in particular is known as the ‘beast of blood’ and there¬ 
fore a lunar form of this element in its formative phase is 

4 6 The swastika. 

4 7 i.e. Equatorial Africa. 

48 The place of sunset. 

4 9 See The Magical Revival, p. 71. 



62 Nightside of Eden 

ascribed to the element and the planet Earth. In the Egyptian 
version of the Seven Heads of the Dragon, the hyena is 
replaced by the bull which, as a type, corresponds to the 
element earth. 

The Serpent is ascribed to the Moon for reasons which 
have already been adduced. In the Egyptian List of the Seven, 
the Serpent is described as ‘going eating his hour*. The hour 
is a division of time and the act of consumption is an allusion 
to the devouring dragon of the eclipse and the five black days 
when light is obscured. It is significant that in an Egyptian 
text ‘She’ (the Serpent) is named ‘The Maker of Invisible 
Existence Apparent’, an allusion to the act of incarnation or 
entifying, and therefore of identifying by the fleshing that is 
the function peculiar to the lunar current in its Ophidian 
phase. 

The Raging Lion can be identified with the planet Mars, 
and this is corroborated in the Egyptian List by the epithet 
‘Red Eyes’. 

The Rebellious Giant or Ape, the vehicle of Thoth, identi¬ 
fies the next member of the Seven with the planet Mercury. 
The symbolism of the Ape and the Giant has been already 
explained. 50 

The final head is named the ‘messenger of the fatal wind’ 
and it is identified with the breath of fire, with Serk, Scorpio, 
Sirocco, and Typhon, the Typhoon. In the Egyptian List this 
head is described as ‘hissing to come forth and turn back; 
seeing by night and bringing by day’, a perfect description of 
the Bennu or Phoenix type of the returner. 

The Seven heads that culminate in the Eight (the Height) 
are the cosmic power-zones 51 plus Daath, the Place of Pur¬ 
gation or Preparation for the ultimate experience typified by 
the Supernal Triad, thus making eleven centres in all. 

In the symbolic representation of the Fall 52 the heads 

S °See page 53. 

s 1 Represented by the seven inferior Sephiroth from Malkuth to Chesed. 

52 See Frontispiece. 


Typhonian Teratomas 63 

of the Dragon bear the names of the eight Edomite 53 Kings, 
and their horns the names of the eleven dukes: ‘And because 
in Daath was the utmost rise of the Great Serpent of Evil; 
therefore there is as it were another Sephira, making eight 
heads according to the number of the eight kings; 54 and for 
the Infernal and Averse Sephiroth eleven instead of ten, 55 
according to the number of the eleven dukes of Edom. 56 

In the human body the eight power-zones form the Mag¬ 
netic Cross shown in diagram 1 of Cults of the Shadow (q.v.) 
and in a system as widely divergent as the Taoist, we find 
Han Shan (1546-1623) expatiating on these basic 8 centres, 
which he refers to as the ‘Eight Consciousnesses’: 

If one breaks through the nest of the Eight Consciousnesses, and 
with one great leap passes right through them, then there is nothing 
more for him to attain . . . Why? Because if the Eight Consciousnesses 
are not broken through, whatever one sees and does are merely 
works of the samsaric si consciousness and senses. 58 

It is when we have made this leap or jump across the Abyss 
- and only then - that ‘we know that we are not ... At that 
moment we realize that we are void, that void is subjectivity, 
and that subjectivity is us — not us as individual selves but us 
as all sentient beings, not as any sort of sentient being but as 
sentient being as such. That is the negative way . . . that is 
why we must know that we are not in order that we may 
understand in what manner we can be’. 59 

The vivifying of these 8 centres by the action of the Fire 
Snake or Kundalini is the aim of all esoteric systems of 
magical and mystical attainment. Not until the Fire Snake 
has been brought to the height, the eighth power-zone, may 

s 3 Edom is another name for Esau which means ‘red*. According to Kuhn 
(Lost Light pp. 257, 275) ‘Esau was called ‘red’ because he sucked his mother’s 
blood before his birth. Sold his birthright for a mess of ‘red’. ‘Tradition shows 
Esau imaged by the solar hawk, which symbolized blood [Hor-Apollo. Bk. I. 6].’ 
The Kings of Edom therefore were Kings of the Red Land or place of blood. 
54 Centres or Zones of Power. 
s 5 Eleven instead of Ten Sephiroth. 

S6 The number of the Qliphoth is 11. 
s 7 i.e. the phenomenal world. 

5 8 Quoted in Ask the Awakened, p. 182 (Wei Wu Wei). 

5 9 Wei Wu Wei commenting on Han Shan’s words. Ibid, p. 182-83. 





64 Nightside of Eden 

the leap be successfully undertaken. The peculiar nature of 
this leap has been hinted at in the writings of the ancients, 
yet the clue has been almost entirely overlooked by most 
modem exponents of the Mysteries. Exceptions are H. P. 
Blavatsky, who concealed the truth rather than revealed it; 
Aleister Crowley, who in The Book of Lies (Liber 333) 60 
treated the matter guardedly, and Michael Bertiaux whose 
generous sprinkling of allusions to the subject are, to date, 
available only to the few who are admitted to the occult 
organization known as The Cult of the Black Snake. 61 These 
Adepts allude to the expressly sexual nature of the key to 
this ultimate Mystery, but whether they have presented it as 
mysticism or as magic or - as in Blavatsky’s case - as the 
work of the devil himself, they leave the reader in little doubt 
as to its potency as a means of attainment. And in order to 
understand how this key operates it is necessary to under¬ 
stand the myth of the banishment of man from the Garden 
of Eden and the magical significance of the so-called ‘Fall’. 

60 As may be expected, since 333 is the number of Choronzon. 

61 Lo Couleuvre Noire. The Inner Order of The Monastery of the Seven Rays 
under the leadership of Michael Bertiaux. See Cults of the Shadow, chapters 9 


7 


Idols of Merodach 


ACCORDING TO an ancient rabbinical tradition of man’s 
fall into matter, he only was cast forth from the Garden of 
Eden while the woman remained behind. Man’s sole means of 
return to ‘paradise’ lay therefore through the woman. This 
allegory is the origin of the symbolism of Woman as the 
first, the inner, the lower, the back, the nightside, while the 
Man came to represent the second, the outer, the higher, 
the front, the daytime, the right. This equation lies at the 
root of man’s later supremacy in the sociological sphere. 

The two primal elements as Adam and Eve 1 supply the 
key also to the magical complex that was reared on the 
polarity of the sexes. Adam, 45, and Eve, 16, when combined 
produce Ain, 61, which is the source of manifestation as the 
Eye of the Void. The number of Eve is that of the kalas. 
Qabalistically interpreted, therefore, the allegory signifies 
man’s return to Paradise via the 16 kalas. 

Ain in reverse (i.e. Nia) is the Daughter, Koph or Qoph 
whose glyph, the Kaf Ape, is the vehicle of Thoth, the moon. 
Ain, 61, as Nia, yields 16, the number of kalas ascribed to the 
Mahakala (i.e. the moon). The lunar path is from west to 
east, the reverse of that of the solar path. Qoph is attributed 
to the Moon in the macrocosm and to the back of the head in 
the microcosm. As previously explained, Resh, the letter of 

*AIM = 45;HVH= 16. 





66 Nightside of Eden 

the Sun is the Head, the back of which is symbolized by the 
Moon. This symbolism is reflected in man (Adam) and 
woman (Eve), the former representing day, the sun; the latter, 
the moon; Adam, the head, Eve the back of the head where 
the seat of the sexual forces is primarily situated. 

The symbolism of the fall contains the original separation 
or cleavage into two halves of the primordial Unity (Ain) 
which, on becoming two, or reproducing itself, becomes the 
Nia or ‘daughter’containing the 16 kalas. J. F. C. Fuller notes 
that .. . allegorically the creation of Eve precedes that of 
Adam, for allegorically the positive forces of life (the mas¬ 
culine) emanate from the negative forces (the feminine). By 
separating the Yod from Tetragrammaton 2 — (Y)HVH — and 
thus creating Eve, a stupendous active and consequently 
demoniacal force is released; for Eve is the ‘mother of all 
living things’ (including the ‘Mother of God’) the female, or 
negative, force of Jah (YH) — the He of which is ever seeking 
to reunite with Yod’. 3 

IHVH, 26, is the sum of the numbers of the sephiroth of 
the main trunk of the Tree 4 excluding Daath. 5 According to 
Crowley the magical formula of the present Aeon is a word 
of eleven letters: Abrahadabra. DBR, which is the root of the 
formula is 206 which is the Oracle or Word of Power that 
emanates from the Ru, the feminine Gateway of the Word of 
Light. DBR is the exact equivalent of the Egyptian Khepsh, 
the hinder thigh typical of the Great Magic Power. 6 Abraha¬ 
dabra is consequently the dynamic or magical expression of 
IHVH (typified by the central trunk of the Tree), the eleven¬ 
fold Word that vibrates in Daath behind the Veil or' Cloud 
of the Abyss. 7 It is the magic spell that re-combines the Yod 
(the lost phallus of Osiris) and the Eve of Eden, represented 

2 i.e. by separating I from IHVH. 

3 The Secret Wisdom of the Qpbalah, p. 130 (J. F. C. Fuller). 

4 I +6 + 9+10 = 26. 

s The number of which is 11. 

6 For considerations of other elements of the word Abrahadabra see Crowley’s 
Commentaries on Al, Liber 418, and Magick. 

7 DBR means also ‘a cloud’. 


Idols of Merodach 67 

by the daughter or final He of IHVH. She is the ‘blue-lidded 
daughter of Sunset’ celebrated in AL (I, 64 and elsewhere). 
She is blue-lidded because blue is the colour of the waters of 
space represented by the Abyss; and of sunset because the 
solar fire sinks into the abyss and is extinguished in the Place 
of Annihilation on the pyre which, in Tantric symbolism, is 
the cremation ground or flower-strewn yoni 8 of Kali (Eve). 
Eve is the manifestation and therefore the reflection of the 
Ain (one, or yoni) as theMa or daughter of sunset. 

The number of Eden, ODNH, 129, is also that of OITM, 
meaning a ‘place of ravenous creatures’, identical with the 
Egyptian atem, ‘to enclose’, ‘to shut up’, ‘to annihilate’, all 
equally applicable to the caverns of Choronzon. ODN or 
ODNH (Eden) means ‘pleasure’. 9 The place of pleasure and 
of annihilation was the shut place or hidden shrine typified 
by the womb or garden. And as the solar seed immured in 
the womb incarnates in flesh, so the Place of Annihilation, or 
Shrine of Choronzon was similarly a place of transformation 
for the future life. 

The ape was the type of transformation and resurrection 
of the spirit, and the name of the ape was Ion which means 
a ‘howling animal of the desert’; it is also the primeval logos , 
word, or speaker, whose ion or aeon is represented by Taht 
or Daath, the place of the crossing or transforming spirit, 
i.e. the place where the spirit crossed over the abyss to lodge 
in the hidden shrine, there to be devoured by the demons of 
Choronzon. 

The Place of Pleasure (Eden) and the Caverns of Choron¬ 
zon (the tunnels of the abyss) are the dual polarities of 
Daath, Eden being the Tep or Top of the Garden, 10 the 
caverns of Set being the Tepth or Depth: Heaven and Hell. 11 

See Karpuradistotra, trans. Arthur Avalon. The yoni is likened to a cremation- 
ground because it consumes everything - even desire. ‘Flower-strewn’ signifies 
the katas or flowings of the yoni. 

9 Genesis xviii. 12. 

I °Le. the South; in later symbolism, the East. 

II Hell was the lower heaven, West; the earlier North. 




68 Nightside of Eden 

Hence Paradise is described in some of the earliest legends as 
the ‘Hades of the Abyss’. 

The first Athena or Aaden (Eden) was buried beneath the 
waters of the abyss, and it was there that the first Eleusinis 
(Temple) was erected in the name of the ever-coming Son- 
Sun, the child of the mother-flood of blood, Hoor-paar- 
Kraat. He was the sun that grew and transformed into the sun 
of the horizon of the resurrection. That is, he came out of 
hell (Amenta) and rose into heaven. He began as a mortal in 
the womb of the mother (the abyss) and was transformed 
into an immortal by the fire of the father (i.e. the sun). 

The current running through Kether-Daath-Tiphereth 
resumes this doctrine of the Child of Darkness manifesting as 
the Child of Light. The Darkness (Nox) of Ain, Hoor-paar- 
kraat, becoming the Light (Lux) of Tiphereth,Ra-Hoor-Khuit. 
The Rites of Eleusis contain the Mystery which is represented 
as a pageant of the seven planetary power-zones (including sun 
and moon) that circle round the eighth or height hidden 
behind the Veil of the Abyss. 

In the Koran Eden is called the Garden of Irem and, 
according to the Arabs, the City of Irem yet stands in the 
Deserts of Aden, although not visible to mortals. 12 The 
people of Irem are known as Ad. 13 This word is the root of 
Had (Hadit), and Irem, Eden, or Aden in the Desert of the 
Abyss, is the abode of Set, the twin of Horns, and the nega¬ 
tive aspect of LUX (Light). 14 It is from the negative, non¬ 
manifest or potential power-zone behind the Veil of the 
Abyss that the positive, phenomenal universe arises. 

It is interesting to note that H. P. Lovecraft writes in his 
celebrated fictionalization of cosmic myth-cycles — The 
Necronomicon — as follows concerning the Great Old Ones: 

12 Cf. AL. III. 34: ‘an invisible house there standeth’. 

1 3 Koran, ch. 89. 

14 Nox ( Notz ) = 210. Nox, 210, Night, or Darkness is therefore the reverse of 
Lux. This number is of supreme importance in the symbolism of the New Aeon; 
for instance it is the number of the Giants or Fallen Ones, of Adam Primus, of 
DVR, a circle or cycle, of ChRB, a sword, and of Nebt-en-Pet, the Queen of 
Heaven. 


Idols of Merodach 69 

Ye Gates are for Them ev’rywhere, but ye 1st was ... in Irem, ye 
City of Pillars, ye city under ye desert... 15 

The pillar is an emblem of Set, one of the meanings of that 
god’s name being a ‘standing stone or pillar’, and the desert 
is the abode of Set (i.e. Daath). Irem, then, was the First 
Gate established by the Old Ones and this Gate was at the 
place of Daath, or Eden. 

There was an Arem or Irem in Mesopotamia. In the 
Huzvaresh it is named Rum, and it is highly significant that 
the first chapter of AL — which purports to be the utterance 
of Ad of Hadit — was transmitted by an Intelligence named 
Oivaz or Aiwaz. This name is identical with Zivo, the deity 
worshipped in ancient Sumer. In the third chapter of AL, 
Aiwaz, in the guise of Horus, informs the Beast 666: 16 

. . . your holy place shall be untouched throughout the centuries: 
though with fire and sword it be burnt down & shattered, yet an 
invisible house there standeth, and shall stand until the fall of the 
Great Equinox: when Hrumachis shall arise and the double-wanded 
one assume my throne and place. Another prophet shall arise, and 
bring fresh fever from the skies, another woman shall awake the lust 
& worship of the Snake; another soul of God and beast shall mingle 
in the globed priest; another sacrifice shall stain the tomb; another 
king shall reign; and blessing no longer be poured To the Hawk¬ 
headed mystical Lord! 

And as if to qualify the dual aspect of the Beast (333 + 333), 
the next verse proclaims: 

The half of the word of Heru-ra-ha, called Hoor-pa-kraat and Ra- 
Hoor-Khut. 17 

The twin aspects of the Beast resume the two halves of the 
Circle of Eden. In the Egyptian hieroglyphics the Circle is 
one with Khepsh, goddess of the North. 18 Her emblem is the 


15 Quoted in The Lurker at the Threshold, p. 112 (Lovecraft & Derleth). 

I6 The Beast comprises Shugal, 333, and Choronzon, 333. 

1 1 AL. HI, 34, 35. The spellings of the forms of Horus are not misprints but 
intentional qabalistic cyphers. See Crowley’s Commentaries on AL. 

18 Nuit-Typhon, the nightside of Eden. 





70 Nightside of Eden 

crooked sword, 19 scythe or scimitar which revolves in the 
heavens making the circle of time by cutting off periods. The 
sword kept the ‘way of the tree of life’ 20 thus establishing 
Time in Chaos. Paradise was created by cutting off the chaos 
of timelessness and establishing the order of cosmos: ‘and the 
Pillar is ’stablished in the void’. 11 This is the Tet pillar of the 
god Taht (Thoth), known to the Jews as Doth (Daath), the 
‘child’ or focus of Wisdom 22 and Understanding 23 typified 
by Saturn, the planetary representative of Typhon and Set. 24 
Their union in Daath creates the duality symbolised by 
Thoth and his ape which is in turn emblematic of the dual 
lunation and the twin currents of energy — magical and 
mystical — concentrated in Ra-Hoor-Khuit and Hoor-paar- 
Kraat. 25 In qabalistic terms the twin currents are 93 and 39. 
93 is thrice 31, and 39 is thrice 13, and they merge in the 
supreme number of the Goddess 393: She who is the ‘secret 
glory’ behind the Mask of the Beast, the Veil of the Abyss. 
39 is the number of IHVH AChD, meaning ‘The Eternal is 
One’ which is described in Sepher Sephiroth 26 as the ‘affir¬ 
mation of the aspiring soul’. This is the mystical aspect of 
the process that leads the aspirant to the threshold of the 
Abyss. 39 is therefore the mystical key to Daath, the window 
in space through which the ego vanishes forever, realizing, as 
it does so, that its absence is one ( achad ) with the Eternal 
(IHVH). 93, on the other hand, is the formula by which the 
process is augmented, i.e. through love {agape, 93) and will 
(thelema, 93). And 393, which blends the twin forces of Set 
and Horns — the lightside and the nightside of the Tree — 
is the number of Sefekh, the consort of Thoth; she is the 

1 ’The sword was a name for the thigh or haunch constellation of the Seven 
Stars of Ursa Major, the stellar symbol of the Goddess. 

20 Genesis, 3, 24. 

*'Liber LX V, V. 

22 Chokmah, typifying the Beast. 

23 Binah, typifying the Scarlet Woman, Babalon. 

2 ’‘Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of the 
beast...’ etc. Revelation, 13,18. 

2s i-e. Horns and Set. 

26 See the Equinox, vol. L No. viii. 


Idols of Mero dach 71 

whore, Babalon, the Scarlet Woman of the Cult of the Beast. 
In Egyptian her name means the number seven. She was the 
primordial goddess of the Seven Stars, who was once the 
‘Living Word’ at Ombos. She was degraded by votaries of 
later cults that had lost contact with the true gnosis. Her 
magical instrument — the uterus — was the original type of 
Typhon. Her name, seven, is also that of her son Sevekh, 
who, as the eighth is the Height of the earliest creation. The 
great Seal of the Ordo Templi Orientis (O.T.O.) resumes this 
entire symbolism as follows: 

The Vesica (uterus) is the Venusian Door (Daleth, a door, = 4.) The 
Eye (Ayin = 70), in the Triangle of Spirit (Shin, spirit = 300) is the 
Typhonian Dove, the Holy Ghost whose letter is Aleph (1). The 
Chalice, Chariot or Graal (Cheth = 8), and the Yod within it (10), 
total 393. 

393 is the number of a highly secret Ophidian formula 
concealed in the name of an ancient extra-terrestrial entity 
known as Aossic. 27 There is in the glyph of Aossic a hidden 
door, the number of which (4), added to 389, the number of 
Aossic, yields 393. It is the door of Venus at the heart of the 
sigil. The goddess is concealed because she is above the abyss 
and presides over the path joining Chokmah and Binah, the 
path attributed to Daleth, the door of the goddess. 

The integers of 393 (3 + 9 + 3) = 15; 1 + 5 = 6, the number 
of the sun or solar-phallic energy. By multiplication 
(3 x 9 x 3), its integers yield 81; 8+1 = 9, the number of 
the moon and of Yesod, the Foundation. Analysing further 
we find that 15 + 81 = 96; and 9 (moon) + 6 (sun) = 15. 
Notice the persistently appearing number 15. By Tarot, Atu 
XV is ascribed to The Devil, Baphomet, the God Set, and it is 
interesting to note that 393 is thrice 131, which is the 
number of Pan and of Samael, 28 and also of Mako, 29 the son 
of Typhon. 131 added to the number of Kteis (the vulva) 30 

2 7 AOShICh = 389. One of the spellings of Aossic. See Sigils on pages 167 & 168. 
28 The Guardian on the Threshold of the Abyss. 

29 A name of Set. 

30 The instrument of Magical Power; the Ur-Hekau. 






72 Nightside of Eden 

is 666! Finally, 131 is the number of 011a (Al-la), the Not, 
the Void, the^lin. 

As a numerical astro-glyph the number 393 is Satum- 
Moon-Satum; the lunar current (9), warded on either side by 
the god Set (3), the formula of reification in the three- 
dimensional world. 

The number 393 reduces to unity by a successive division 
of its integers: three into nine yields three; three into three 
yields one, which is achad, 13, unity. Adding the full formula 
of the Pentagram 31 to the number 393, the Key Number of 
the Great Work is obtained, viz: 418. 

The Scarlet Woman — 393 — is less 666, ‘the Beast whereon 
she rideth’, by 273, which is the number of AVR GNVZ, ‘the 
Hidden Light’, and ABN MASU HBVNIM, ‘the Stone which 
the builders rejected’. 273 is also the number of ARBO, 
meaning ‘four’, the sign of the cross or crossing, and of the 
four directions of space. 

393 subtracted from the sacred number 718 32 yields 325, 
which is the Mystic Number of Bartzabel, the Spirit of Mars, 
and of Graphiel, the Intelligence of Mars. This number is the 
sum total of the series 1-25, thus resuming the formula of the 
Pentagram which is also that of the Goddess whose basic 
number is 5. 

393 multiplied by 3 33 equals 45; and 4 + 5 = 9. Notice the 
persistence of 9, the number of the Moon and of the sephira 
Yesod, the abode of the Fire Snake and of the sexual function 
in man. Man (ADM) is 45; he is composed of A, ‘breath’ or 
‘spirit’, and DM, ‘blood’. 45 is the Mystic Number of Yesod, 
the power-zone of the Yezidi who, in their most secret 
traditions transmitted the magical current of Aiwass which 
flowed from the Star of the Foundation. 34 45 is also the 

31 5 2 or 5 x 5 = 25. 

32 This number, which is ‘loaded’ in Thelema with many connotations, is that 
of The Abomination of Desolation and of the Stele of Revealing, the pantacle of 
the Aeon of Homs. See AL, and The Confessions of Aleister Crowley. The number 
718 is the double formula of 359, ShTN (Satan), and, as such, the basis of the 
Great Work. See the Typhonian Trilogy. 

3 3 The number of figures of which it is composed. 

34 See Robert Temple, The Sirius Mystery, page 48. 


Idols of Merodach 73 

number of MAD, an Enochian word meaning ‘god’. And, 
finally, 45 is the series 1-9 and, as such, it resumes the entire 
lunar current. It is the number of AGLAL, the Intelligence of 
Saturn, which is the planetary representative of Set; and of 
MAD,‘the Fool’. 35 

The Hebrew word Adam derives from the Egyptian Atem, 
the Mother Goddess of Time and Periodicity, hence Adam 
signifies ‘man’ (i.e. humanity), as the continuity of existence 
incarnate. 

The above considerations concentrate the main ideas con¬ 
nected with the number 393, the Great Seal of the O.T.O., 
and the Sigil of Aosssic which contains the ultimate formulae 
of Ophidism Magick. They establish the identity not only of 
these three major formulae but, more importantly, of the 
interpretation of the Key Numbers of AL and the Draconian 
Tradition generally: viz, 13, 31, 39, 93, 393, 666. 

Furthermore, 393 + 666 = 1059, which is one less than 
MShKN ( Meshken ), ‘the Tabernacle’, and two less than 1061, 
‘Sunset’. 36 The Meshken is the womb or birthplace rep¬ 
resented by the thigh of Typhon whose symbol is the scimitar, 
the scythe, the crooked sword. The sword, as previously 
shown, is identical with the cleaver, the cleft (yoni), 
symbolised by the dove. The entire Draconian doctrine is 
contained in the symbol of the sword terminating in a bird’s 
tail. 

The solution of continuity was effected by the cleaver into 
two typified by the fiendess Geh whose number, 13, denotes 
menstruation as the marking off or dividing of time (con¬ 
tinuity) into periods. Original unity was thereby broken up, 
as when light in heaven was obscured by an eclipse or dark 
period. The malefic element associated with the number 13 
in the later, solar, cults had its origin in the physiological 
phenomenon of menstruation. 

3s Atu O, the first Tarot Trump, which is attributed to the .4m, the Empty 
One. The Formula of the Fool, Knave or Clown, was exemplified in recent times 
by such adepts as Blavatsky, Crowley, and Gurdjieff. 

36 Cf.AL 1,64. 




74 Nightside of Eden 

According to a rabbinical legend Adam’s first wife, Lilith, 
assumed the form of a serpent in order to seduce Adam. The 
legend is explicable only in the light of primal occult lore 
which connects blood with the manifestation or incarnation 
of spirit. In the apocryphal writing, Esdras, appears the state¬ 
ment: ‘and menstruous women shall bring forth monsters’, 
which Massey relates to improper time-keeping, both in a 
biological sense, and, later, in a celestial or astronomical 
sense. 3 7 But Massey was unaware of certain aspects of occult 
phenomena because, at the time of his researches, 38 frag¬ 
ments of the true gnosis survived only in the Tantric texts of 
the Far East, very few of which had then been translated into 
any European language. It is in the light of these texts alone 
that the occult symbolism connected with Geh, and the 
Ophidian Current in general, may be properly interpreted. 

The lunar current typified by the number 13, and Geh or 
Go 3 9 is connected with the vaginal or ophidian vibrations that 
manifest the kalas of which the Goddess Kali is the supreme 
embodiment. Kali, by Gematria, is 61, the Am or Eye of the 
Void; the creative feminine formula. In reverse (i.e. as Nia) 
this eye is of the night and of the darkness of eclipse typified 
by Geh. The number 61 in reverse denotes the 16 kalas of 
which the whole Eye (i.e. the two eyes) is the symbol. The 
two eyes are AINNIA and NIAAIN and their number is 122, 
the number of Gilgalim, ‘revolutions’ or ‘cycles’ (of time); of 
HSIUM, ‘the end’, and of IQBI, ‘wine presses’, all of which 
express the idea of Kali and of period in one concept. 122 is 
one more than SATAN. 40 The Satanic current is the source 
of many ancient concepts that have been misinterpreted by 
modem minds as demonic in a moral sense. But the original 
sense was otherwise, if not the actual reverse. However, the 
New Aeon has brought with it that which the ancients 

3 7 Certain Constellations were observed to fail in keeping strict time. Sirius, 
for instance, was seen to lose one whole year in its cycle of 1460 years. See The 
Natural Genesis. H. 103. 

38 The late 19th century. 

39 This Sanskrit word, meaning ‘cow* is an euphemism for the human female. 

40 By Italian (or ‘simple’) Qabalah; Qabalah Simplex. 


Idols of Merodach 75 

intuited but which they were unable to posit scientifically 
because the quality of anti-matter, anti-being, of all that is 
implied by the symbolism of the Abyss, was not susceptible 
of measurement. Hence the massive accretion of myths and 
legends treating of the ‘evil’ aspects of the forces of life and 
death. Yet, as the ancients became gradually aware that the 
same and not a different sun rose and set each day, so in the 
New Aeon man is becoming increasingly conscious of the 
possibility not only of exploring the other side of the Tree, 
but of the fact that it is merely the other side of a single 
entity which is identical with our selves; the one side magical, 
the other mystical, in a sense quite other than any previously 
entertained. 

There is a clue to these mysteries in the word Gilgalim. A 
word very similar to this, viz., Gillulim, signifies the idols of 
the goddess Merodach. 41 Both the idols and Merodach are 
‘excrementitious’ or ‘menstruating’, and the Septuagint refers 
to the goddess as ‘the delicate Merodach’. Isaiah 42 describes 
the parturient deities as being in labour but unable to bring 
forth, while Jehovah is the true god whose children jure 
‘borne from the belly, carried from the womb’. The dis¬ 
tinction is physiological, the occult import being that 
whereas Jehovah represents the creative powers of the hither 
side of the Tree, Merodach and the gillulim are the dark 
forces, the powers of annihilation, anti-being, on the night- 
side of the Tree. There are numerous similar clues in the 
ancient writings of the Egyptians and the Jews, but they may 
be correctly interpreted only in relation to the knowledge 
that modern scientifc discoveries have revealed. Research into 
UFOs and extraterrestrial beings, which may have been ruled 
out until today for want of scientific knowledge, is also 
opening up new approaches and, therefore, new dimensions 
in ancient scriptures and magical texts. The monsters des¬ 
cribed in the Berosian account of creation, and in innumerable 
later myths have been misinterpreted as applying to a) an 

41 Jeremiah 1, 2. 

42 Xlvi. 1, 2. 




76 


Nightside of Eden 

abortive attempt on the part of God at creating humanity (as 
by the Jews), and b) as a mythical method of expressing 
astronomical phenomena (as by evolutionists of the 19th 
century). The initiated interpretation, although implicit in 
secret writings such as the commentaries on The Book of 
Dzyan, has not yet been explicated; again, for want of 
scientific knowledge. 

All such teratomas are distorted shadows of a reality cast 
through the veil from the nightside of Eden. 


8 


The Divine Ape 


THE GODDESS Kali embodies the idea of Time and of 
Chaos 1 in one image. She was the first divider into two in the 
physical sense of time and the disruption of time by the 
eclipse of periodic chaos. 2 Kali, whose number is 61, Ain, is 
the Black and White One in a single image; a symbol of the 
dual lunation as well as of the menstruous and gestating 
female; the virgin and the mother. The first magical circle was 
thus, strictly speaking, a mystical circle which had in it a 
break that let in the spirits of chaos from the Watery Abyss, 
typified in myth by the Deluge of Deucalion and the Flood 
of Noah. 

But Kali more particularly came to represent chaos, night, 
or blackness as the type of death and negation in a mystical 
sense: the mystical circle with the breach that admitted the 
Typhonian teratomas described by Berosus, rather than the 
circle of the Sun which was the type of the Magical Circle in 
later ages, was the primordial symbol of the Goddess. It is 
implicit in the zodiacal circle of the year with its round of 
nine dry signs and three water signs. The latter typify the 
incursion of chaos. The 9 dry months typify the bearing 
mother symbolized by the necklet of nine beads which Isis 
wore. The cross with three equal arms and a fourth that was 

1 Timless, no limit, etc. 

2 i.e. menstrual flow. 





78 Nightside of Eden 

longer, pointing downward to the depths, 3 was another glyph 
of the full cycle, or crossing of three quarters with the fourth 
letting in the deluge. The symbolism is implicit also in the 
concept of the primal curse attributed to the witch, the dark 
one whose eye was red, or ‘evil’, because radiating emanations 
from the abyss of blood. The curse implied the in-cursion of 
the qliphoth which the witch directed with a glance of her 
baleful eye (am). The ‘Force of Coph Nia’ is therefore the 
Force of the Evil Eye of the Daughter or Witch, because the 
daughter was the typical virgin in contradistinction to the 
gestating mother. The witch, geh or gek was the gauche one, 
the awkward or left-handed one, the left hand that ‘is empty 
[void] for I have crushed am Universe; & nought remains’. 4 
The meaning is that the curse of the daughter-witch typified 
the incursion of forces from the other side. 

It should be unnecessary to remark that the phenomenon 
of menstruation would not alone have caused the massive 
dread and abhorrence with which ancient scriptures, myths, 
and legends, are replete. The eclipse, whether celestial or 
physiological, was a type, a symbol of dark forces infinitely 
more terrifying than mere sexual promiscuity and its con¬ 
comitant diseases. Nor were these forces veiled in obscure 
symbols for reasons other than that the ancients were unable 
precisely to define them. They merely suspected that woman 
and her peculiar mechanism constituted, in some manner 
unknown to them, a door, a gateway on to the void, through 
which awful forces could be invoked by those who chanced 
upon the keys. That these keys were known to a few is 
probable, and it is also probable that the Sumerians, the 
Egyptians, the Americans, the Mongols, were acquainted each 
with a fragment of a vastly ancient gnosis — the science of 
the kalas, which has survived into modem times in certain 
Asiatic Mystery Schools. Many Tamil texts, for instance, 

3 The so-called Calvary Cross. The longest aim, the southern, was attributed to 
Set. In the perversion of the Christian symbolism known as the ‘black mass’ the 
cross is inverted so that the southern arm, or that attributed to Set or Satan is 
then uppermost, i.e. exalted above the trinity; represented by the remaining three. 


The Divine Ape 79 

although extant, have not been translated into Western 
tongues, although certain secret manuscripts have circulated 
among Adepts in the Western hemisphere for incalculable 
periods of time. In comparatively recent times traffic with 
forces from the abyss was established by Dr. Dee and Sir 
Edward Kelly, whose ‘Enochian Calls’ have been used to 
evoke even Choronzon, the Guardian on the Threshold.* 
H. P. Blavatsky was also aware of the existence of secret keys 
to this nighted region. She makes a point of explaining that 
Set or Sat is Be-ness, which includes Being and non-Being; it 
does not mean Existence, as commonly supposed. In 7 Tie 
Secret Doctrine 6 she makes a further important point that: 
‘The idea that things can cease to exist and still BE, is a 
fundamental one in Eastern psychology’. 

The zoomorphic symbol of the mirror universe, 7 as of the 
astral universe, is the ape. This animal is identified by Massey 
as the Kehkeh, an Egyptian word meaning not only ‘ape’, but 
a ‘crazy man’, ‘a fool’. Kehkeh is another form of Gehgeh or 
Geh, the ‘insane woman’, the witch, the archetype of the 
Hek-Hek or Hecate, the Hexe or Hag-type of transformation 
as the Hekt that changes from the tadpole into the frog. 8 

In the Harris Papyrus there is an allusion to a transfor¬ 
mation in which the lion-god assumes the form of an ape: 
‘Thou didst take the form of a monkey (Kafi) and afterwards 
of a crazy man (kehkeh)’. 9 The crazy man or mad monkey is 
also The Fool of the Tarot called the ‘ape of seven cubits’ 
who dwells in the ‘shrine of seven cubits’ from which he pro¬ 
gresses to a ‘shrine of eight cubits’. He is the symbol of the 
culmination of the seven inferior elementaries in the eighth, 
thus explaining the madness experienced by the Adept as the 
seven ‘souls’ or stages of his initiation which culminates in 
the Ordeal of the Abyss. 

5 See Liber 418, The Vision and the Voice, Tenth Aethyr. 

6 Vol. I, p. 54. 

7 Universe ‘B’, the ‘meon’ or anti-universe. 

8 The word hekt means ‘frog’. See Part II for a full explanation of this totem in 
relation to the other side of the Tree of Life. 

9 Cf. The Formula of the Divine Ape described in The Encyclopedia of the 
Unexplained, article entitled Spirits and Forces, by Kenneth Grant. 










80 Nightside of Eden 

According to rabbinical lore, Adam was created with a tail 
in the likeness of an oran-outang. Gerald Massey, who quotes 
the tradition, explains it by observing that as the Jews were 
not evolutionists the tradition witnesses the survival of 
Egyptian typology. But the fact is, Egyptian typology itself 
was based upon an occult knowledge of the incursion of 
forces from the ‘other side’. Those forces spawned apes this 
side, thus accounting for legends such as Yima’s fall, which, 
like Adam’s, referred to a fall through the Abyss (Daath), not 
into it. 

The fool, ape, or crazy man, the gekh or gehkeh, is the 
Geh of Persian lore, the Scarlet Woman of biblical lore, and 
she that is described in the Bundahish as the ‘active agent of 
hell’. She says ‘I will shed thus so much Vesh 10 or venom on 
the righteous man and labouring ox 11 that through my deeds 
life will not be wanted’. The Evil Spirit, delighted with the 
witch’s speech embraces and kisses her, so that ‘the pol¬ 
lution which they call menstruation became apparent in 
Geh’. 12 The menstrual flow, symbolizing the disruption of 
continuity, was used by the Parsees to typify the mechanism 
by which the Evil One exterminated the fire that Zarathustra 
had brought from heaven; the water that damped the fire of 
the spirit, the water of the abyss, the negative power that 
swept in by means of the Ape or Fool. 

In order to obviate a possible and serious misunderstanding 
it is necessary to emphasize here the fact that the ape as such, 
or any creature presently extant upon the earth was not the 
result of contact with extra-terrestrial influences. The 
monkey or ape was the symbol of a type of creation spawned 
by forces beyond the veil of the void. This creation was 
sucked into manifestation not only from extra-terrestrial but 
also from extra-dimensional sources via the tunnel under 
the Path of the Fool 13 on the averse side of the Tree of Life. 

10 Cf. Besh (Egyptian), meaning ‘menstruating’. 

11 The ox is aleph. The Fool of the Tarot is attributed to the path to which 
this letter is ascribed. 

12 Bundahtsh , ch. iii. 3-7. 

13 5ymbolized by the Ape of Thoth. 


81 


The Divine Ape 

That the actual Beast was more hideous than the ape or 
any presently known species of animal may be appreciated 
after reading a description of a pre-eval figurine of antarctic 
origin described in certain of Lovecraft’s fictions. 14 Such an 
object, not fashioned by human hands, has not yet been 
found upon earth, but certain sensitives known to the present 
author have seen that which is undeniably the archetype of 
this monstrous and primal beast. It is described in The Lurker 
at the Threshold as an ‘octopoid cephalopod’. Bat-winged 
and clawed in its lower extremity, it possesses a central 
glowing eye — redish and baleful — set at the top of the head, 
while the lower part of the face (where one would expect 
a mouth) is a mass of writhing tentacles, eight in number. It 
is, in fact, the archetypal 8-headed beast that flowed blackly 
from the tunnels of Set, extruding at the Place of Death. It 
emerged via Daath and poured into the chalices of the 
inferior hebdomad. This was the flowing water symbolized 
by the serpent, the vesh or venom of which Hadit speaks 
(AL. II, 26) : 

If I lift up my head, I and my Nuit [Ain] are one. If I droop down 
mine head, and shoot forth Venom, then is rapture of the earth, 
and I and the earth are one. 

And in the following verse (the 93rd verse of the Book as 
a whole) appear these words: 

There is great danger in me, for who doth not understand these 
runes shall make a great miss. He shall fall down into the pit called 
Because, and there he shall peish with the dogs of Reason. 1 5 
Afterwhich a curse is pronounced upon ‘Because and his 
kin’! These verses are the 26th and 2 7th of the second chapter 
of AL, and 92 and 93 of the Book as a whole. The number of 
Nakak is 92. 16 93 is the supreme key of AL and of the major 

l *The Lurker at the Threshold (Lovecraft and Dcricth). 

15 A reference to Daath. Italics by present author. 

16 Nakak denotes the Curse, the Accursed, and the Typhonian image of the 
Devourer, as the Crocodile or Water Dragon was its determinative in the hiero¬ 
glyphics. Nakak was the primordial type of the shadow which was later typified 
as the Gek or Gih (13), the witch-woman who assumed the form of a serpent to 
beguile her victims. 






82 Nightside of Eden 

magical formulae of the present Aeon. As has been men¬ 
tioned, one meaning of aeon or ion is ‘an howling animal of 
the desert’, it is also a name of the ape (in Egyptian). 17 
Numbers 26 and 27 refer to the Paths of Ay in (the Eye), 
and Pe (the Mouth), respectively. These organs typify the 
Secret Eye of the Void, 18 and the Mouth or Word rep¬ 
resented by the Ape of Thoth who utters no human word, 
but a ‘wild and monstrous speech’. Thus are we constantly 
thrown back upon the symbolism of the reification of the 
Negative (Eye-Void) via the Positive (Mouth of the Abyss). 

It has been suggested 19 that Besz or Vesz was the Egyptian 
original of the Sumerian Zivo, Oivz, i.e. Ai-vaz. The ‘Betch 
party’ were the eight elementary gods of Egypt which rep¬ 
resented the forces of chaos from whence the dark goddess 
Bast derived her name, and the words bastard, bitch, and 
beast, were deposited in later language as denoting the 
mother-source independent of masculine essence. It is now 
suggested that the Persian Vesh, venom, is also linked with 
Aiwass as typical of the Draconian Tradition in its primal 
form of the negative current which - in turn - is typified 
by the lunar vibration, the vehicle of which is the menstrual 
flow. This symbolism identifies the Serpent of Eden with 
the venom of Vesh or Aivass, and indicates its magical iden¬ 
tity with the Ape of Thoth, the Howler of the Desert, Shugal 
333, the Ion, and the Scarlet Woman, Babalon; all finding 
their focus of function through the Pylon of the Abyss. 20 
Hence Aiwass describes himself 21 as the ‘minister of Hoor- 
paar-Kraat’, the negative current. 

The Geh or the Gekis Lilith, the witch-wife of Adam; the 
shakti or power of reification in Eden of the forces of Ain 
manifesting through the Word of the Ape of Thoth via the 

See also Frater Achad’s considerations of the word ion quoted in Cults of 
the Shadow, chapter 8. 

18 A in, the reverse of which is Nia, the Daughter. 

19 The Magical Revival, p. 57. 

20 The word 'abyss’ has obvious affinities with the besz, bisz, or vesz (vesh), 
and so with aiwass. 

21 AL, L 7. 


The Divine Ape 83 

Path of the Fool. 22 This shakti (Geh) is the link between 
Ain-Kether and Chokmah-Masloth (the Sphere of the Fixed 
Stars) which symbolize the supernal hebdomad as the 
Goddess of the Seven Stars who illumines the void of night 
and the abyss of space. She is the primal manifestation of 
extra-terrestrial Intelligence as a keeper of Time. 

The earliest observed duality or division was that between 
Dark and Light (Set and Horns), and the Abyss is the ‘division 
hither homeward’ 23 that divided the primal darkness of the 
Ain (Nuit, Night, the Mother) from the brightness of 
Tiphareth (the Sun, Day, the Son). And the mediator or 
passage from the one to the other is via the Moon, Taht 
(Daath), which flows through Yesod in the infernal heb¬ 
domad, which is to say that as the light of the moon resumes 
the Night of Nuit and the Day of Tiphereth, so Yesod is the 
link between male and female, the sexual twilight that with¬ 
draws into night on the female side and into light on the 
male side, thus completing the circle of creation. 

The symbol of the twilight is the jackal who appears at 
dawn and at dusk. This is the origin of the double Anubis, 
the black and golden dog who became the type of Set as a 
combination in one image of Mercury and the Sun, Mercury 
being the lunar type of the watcher in twilight, hence the 
dappled or hybrid nature of the god that comprised both 
light and shade. 

The dappled one was the doubled one, and it became a 
symbol of the astral double, the shade, le diable, the devil, 
the one who twinned and became two, the cloven one. His 
symbol was the hoof or heft because he came of the Kheft, 
the Mother-Goddess who is represented as the Abyss, the 
primal cleft. The Jews located this splitting into two at the 
place of Daath, where Negative Being becomes manifest. 
Daath is the Duat or Tuat, the Twat or cleft of the Goddess 
who reproduces herself. She is the mirror or doubling one, 

J2 The Path of the Fool or Gekh is the eleventh path, as Daath is the eleventh 
sephira. 

23 AL HI. 2. 




T 


84 Nightside of Eden 

the reproducer whose symbol is the Eye that reflects or sees 
the image of itself, i.e. reproduces itself. This is why the 
blind Horns’ 24 typifies the chaos of timelessness or anti¬ 
time. The break in the Circle therefore represented chaos, the 
marauding powers of the qliphoth that encroached upon the 
Circles or Cycles of Time. 

It is only when the symbolic meaning of blindness has 
been understood as the antithesis of Time, and therefore of 
Cosmos, that Darkness can be understood as the antithesis 
of Light. In rabbinical lore, the first demon named as the 
assistant of Darkness (the Evil One) is Geh, the insane 
woman, the mad virgin, the eclipser of the Light and the per¬ 
sonification of menstruation as a disrupter, discontinuer, and 
therefore a bringer of Chaos into Cosmos. She was the 
archetypal representative of the solution de continuity 
typified by Daath, the eleventh sephira and the ‘interval’ as 
it were between the creative impulse emanated by the Super¬ 
nal Triad, and the Infernal Hebdomad represented by the 
seven inferior sephiroth. Geh represents the break in the 
magical circle that lets in the demon hordes of chaos and 
disruption. This is the formula of the Scarlet Woman which is 
wholly negative in respect of phenomenal creation for it 
signifies the Way Down to the root of the Tree leading into 
noumenal silence. Yet this is the silence of supreme potential 
symbolized by Hoor-paar-Kraat, the god Set who is the 
Seat, the Foundation, the very basis of the phenomenal 
universe typified by Ra-Hoor-Khuit. Geh is the left, the north, 
the abyss that emanates the light behind the Veil of the Void. 
As such she is the shakti or reifying power of the forces 
symbolized by the World Egg or Akash whose colour is black 
(total darkness). 

When equinoctial time was established, the West replaced 
the North as the origin of the dark forces, because it opposed 


swathil ■ th K SU J* in Am '" t \ symboUzed by Osiris-tesh-tesh, the dead or inert one 
swathed m bandages as the feminine type of the Word, bound up in linen at the 
tone of her penod. The blind Horus is therefore the wordless aeon and equates 
with the Zam symbolism described in a previous chapter (q.v.) 


The Divine Ape 85 

the place of emerging light. 25 Hence the Egyptians referred 
to the West as ‘the place of noxious demons’ or creatures of 
the night. 26 The Great Nox (Night) was the abode of the 
Nakak as the snake-pit or hole of the serpent who disappeared 
each night into the lake in the west in the form of the croco¬ 
dile. This was the dragon of the deep whose tail, disappearing 
in the waters, became the hieroglyphic of darkness, blackness, 
death. Men of the dark, or black men, only, were said to have 
tails. This was an early mode of designating those bom of the 
mother alone at a time when paternity was not known or 
individualized in society. Thus argues the evolutionist. But 
according to the secret doctrine the creatures with tails that 
swarmed over the earth were the spawn of a pre-human 
creation resulting from an occult miscegenation of which 
prehistoric sexual promiscuity was but a pale reflection in 
the realm of humanity. 

The Rabbis likened Adam to the oran-outang because, 
they asserted, he also had a tail. Gerald Massey cites the fact 
as proof that the Egyptian tradition survived in Jewish lore. 
But the Egyptian tradition itself was based upon initiated 
knowledge of the incursion of Forces from the ‘other side’, 
forces which spawned the apes on this. Yima’s plight in the 
Bundahish, like the biblical Adam’s, resulted not so much 
from a fall from a superior state but, rather, a fall through 
the extra-dimensional aperture of the abyss represented by 
Daath, the glyph of which is the Ape of Thoth. In this sense 
only may the symbolism be understood, for no mere fall in 
a sexual sense will account for the disproportionate import¬ 
ance of a myth common to all the major occult traditions 
and religions of the world. 

The Hottentots and the blacks of Australia have preserved 
some of the most ancient versions of these myths. The latter 
claimed descent from a man named Noh who entered the 
world by a ‘sort of window’. Noh or No is the Egyptian Aw, 
and the name identifies him with the watery abyss which was 

25 The East: place of the rising sun. 

26 Proclus in the Timaeus, Book 1. 






86 Nightside of Eden 

symbolic of the ‘ocean of space’. One of the earliest accounts 
of creation, therefore, acknowledges the fact that conscious¬ 
ness first made its appearance from ‘outside’; from an extra¬ 
terrestrial source. That this visitant came from the deep, 
the waters, the well, pool, or abyss, is a constant feature of 
innumerable myths. The Egyptians had their Pool of Pant 
and Lake of Fire from which daemonic forces were said to 
emerge and seize the living, and, most significantly, the 
pyramids themselves were built over a well of water typical 
of the deep. Mariette describes the (typical) pyramid as a 
gigantic lid over a well of water, a lid designed to keep out 
the denizens of the abyss, and it may not be mere coinci¬ 
dence that the glyph of the Tree of Life itself shows Daath 
(the abyss) capped by the triangle or pyramid of the 
Supemals. Daath is the window through which the latent 
energies of the infernal hebdomad flow from the other side 
of the Tree. They overflow into the Sephiroth which form 
the foci of cosmic force in the Outer, for manifest creation is 
but the patent and phenomenal expression of latent and 
noumenal potential. 

The nature of the entity Noh that makes its appearance 
through the window in space is identical with the negative No 
of our language today. Noh, 125, is one more than ODN, 
Eden, and its meaning (in Hebrew) is ‘motion’, ‘shaking’; it 
derives from the Egyptian nahuh or nnuh, ‘to shake’, ‘toss’, 
motion’. In other words, Noh indicates the vibration where¬ 
by the noumenal imagery of the abyss became living, moving, 
creatures. Noh is the formula of subjectivity objectivizing. 

To revert to the pyramidal structure of the Supernal 
Triad: this becomes tridimensionalized if lines are drawn 
from Kether, frontally and dorsally, to connect with Daath 
thus making a four-sided figure with its apex in Kether, its 
base being the square of Daath (dorsal), Chokmah, Binah, 
and Daath (frontal). In this way it will be seen how the lid 
covers the remaining sephiroth comprised of the ‘infernal 
seven’, of which the sun - Ra-Hoor-Khuit - is the most 
important. It is the reflection (Tiphereth) in the infernal 


The Divine Ape 87 

hebdomad of Hoor-paar-Kraat (Ain) above the Abyss, and 
above even Kether where it shines as the Eye of the Void. 
The mechanics of phenomenal reification may thus be under¬ 
stood, for the supemals are founded upon the abyss and are 
its complementary counterparts. But as the real rootage of 
the Ain lies in Yesod (the moon), so is Kether rooted in 
Tiphereth, which is a manner of saying that as the moon — 
(Yesod) — woman is the Negative in manifest creation and 
the representative of Hoor-paar-Kraat, so the sun — 
(Tiphereth) — man is the Positive in manifest creation and 
the representative of Ra-Hoor-Khuit. And Shaitan-Aiwass is 
the Pivot — Daath - the Abyss that polarises these two forces 
in perfect equilibrium. 

It is now plain why Set (Hoor-paar-Kraat), the black or 
descending one, is the formula of magick, reification, incar¬ 
nation; while Homs (Ra-Hoor-Khuit), the white or ascending 
one, is the formula of transformation into spirit. Black or red 
is the colour of sex and of manifestation, of sunset and of the 
night; white, or gold, is the colour of dawn and of the day. 
Matter and Spirit combine to form the dual polarities of the 
Tree, inner and outer, descending and ascending, and the 
point of emission — as of return — is Daath, imaged by the 
Ape of Thoth and the Dog of Set. 

It is at the moment of manifestation that the elemental 
forces are transposed, or evoked, from Space into Time. The 
Abyss typifies the primal Mother as Space. The stellar 
universe (space) seeded with souls (stars) typifies chaos 
become cosmos by the introduction of periodic cycles of 
time. The blind forces of chaos in the infinities of space 
preceded the planets and stars as celestial intelligencers, 
which established order by creating time in the form of aeons 
etc. The forces of the ‘other side’, being timeless, were therefore 
chaotic and existed only in the spaces that were considered 
dark, disruptive, lawless, qliphotic, they were the inverse 
spaces of the sephiroth, or cosmic emanations inclusive of the 
planets as representing phenomenal law and order in the form 
of time cycles. 




88 Nightside of Eden 

Mythology has preserved in its predominantly zoomorphic 
imagery an accurate record of the beginning of time as a 
projection from space (noumenon) into phenomena of 
repetition, recurrence, re-appearance, which occurred when 
man began to notice the periodic return of certain stellar 
configurations projected through space. These were deposited 
in mythology as the haunters of the deep, 27 which seethed 
with the extra-terrestrial demons that have swarmed in myth 
and legend in the guise of the typhonian teratomas — giants, 
gnomes, elves, fairies etc., of the elemental kingdoms, but, 
above all in the curious hybrids and primeval mutations later 
stylized in the form of sphinxes, gryphons, unicorns, and all 
manner of fabulous beasts. 

These pre-eval and primeval types survive also in the hells of 
the subconscious and are amenable to invocation and — though 
more rarely — evocation. Austin Osman Spare, 28 for instance, 
evolved a system of magical sigils for controlling these monst¬ 
rous atavisms and for reifying the qualities and powers which 
they symbolize and which they once possessed upon earth long 
ages before humanity emerged. In traditional Western Esoteric 
Orders this primeval complex evolved into the highly sophisti¬ 
cated mystique of the Holy Guardian Angel which combines 
the daemonic and the human, the spirit and its shadow, extra¬ 
terrestrial and human consciousness. All initiated systems of 
ritual are methods of establishing contact with beings of the 
‘other side’. Whether these are considered to be extra-terrestrials 
from outer space, or subjective denizens of inner space, 
makes little difference to the practical occultist. Both are areas 
of magical powers equal to those possessed by the gods 29 
themselves. Because one aspect only of the process has 
hitherto been considered lawful, 3 0 the energies at the back of 
the Tree, hidden because latent, are dreaded as a lurking 

2 7 Water being a type of the ocean of space. 

28 See Images and Oracles of Austin Osman Spare, Muller, 1975. 

29 A term used by occultists to denote vast aggregates of stars, sum, etc., and 
the intelligences behind them. 

30 Le. the attainment of states of consciousness typified by Horns (Ra-Hoor- 
Khuit). 


The Divine Ape 89 

danger to the individualized consciousness. They are, even 
today, considered ‘evil’ and are stigmatised as unlawful, 
chaotic, qliphotic. Hence all religions have forbidden com¬ 
merce with demons on the assumption that to traffic with 
the qliphoth is to surrender human consciousness and lose 
identity in the swamp of the Abyss. These forces, which have 
been gaining momentum through successive aeons, are 
pouring astrally from the averse side of the Tree and are 
threatening to overwhelm human consciousness with the 
waves of negative vibrations that underlie all positive (i.e. 
phenomenal) existence. It is not therefore surprising that 
sensitive souls are now recoiling in horror because they have 
seen — in the swirling black mirror of the abyss — the shades 
massing for an unprecedented influx into the cosmos. The 
breach has been made by nuclear activity that has disturbed 
the balance of the ions, and unless the correct keys are 
applied the Circle of human consciousness will be invaded by 
powers from the other side. 

The ancients were aware of the crack in space through 
which such an invasion could pour, and more than one great 
Mystery School has posited Daath as the point of entry. The 
myth of the Old Ones returning to reclaim the thrones of 
the earth is a very ancient theme and one that has been 
revived in recent decades not only in the fictional writings of 
such natural sensitives as Arthur Machen, Algernon Black¬ 
wood, H. P. Lovecraft, etc., but also in the writings of 
physicists who are aware of the occult implications revealed 
by nuclear and sub-nuclear research. And it is only now that 
certain ancient occult traditions — especially those concerning 
the Tree of Life — may be read otherwise than as a super¬ 
stitious dread of ‘evil spirits’. 

The Schwarschild ‘black hole’ in space which has been 
likened to a sponge or dougnut, or a solid mass perforated by 
worm-holes like Emmenthaler cheese, gives some idea of the 
anatomy of the multi-dimensional Tree. The wormholes are 
the hells or hidden holes, unnoticed because dwarfed by the 
spheres of the sephiroth. The leap across the abyss which the 







90 Nightside of Eden 

initiate has to make in order to transcend phenomenal exist¬ 
ence and penetrate the Veil of the Void is vividly explicated 
by John Taylor in his book entitled Black Holes although, of 
course, his remarks have to be translated into terms of 
Typhonian metaphysics as I have done in the notes to what 
follows: 

It is precisely such a jump, through the ‘superspace’ of the interior 
of the doughnut, that is allowed by worm holes. They allow these 
direct connections which would otherwise take so long. We can 
imagine each of these worm holes as dots giving access to the dough¬ 
nut’s interior at the two points we are interested in , 31 one we can 
call the earth, the other a distant star. We enter superspace 3 2 through 
the wormhole at the earth and leave it at the other wormhole at the 
distant star ; 3 3 the whole journey could be instantaneous . 3 4 

This extract is reminiscent of the Star Sponge vision which 
Crowley had during a magical retirement in New England, at 
Montauk, on the bank of Lake Pasquanay. 3 5 Initiates of the 
Black Snake Cult will be reminded of the Voltigeurs, Vaulters 
or Leapers, described by Michael Bertiaux in connection with 
certain secret paths on the back of the Tree. 36 

Crantz, cited by Massey, mentions a class of spirits dreaded 
by the Greenlanders. They are the ghosts of those who died 
when the world turned upside down in a vast deluge. They 
were said to have been transformed into flames and they 
sheltered themselves in caverns and clefts in the rock. This 
legend, which is typical of many such, suggests a sudden and 
catastrophic overturning of the Tree. It not only turns upside 
down, it keeled over so that the ‘other side’ shed its con¬ 
suming flames into the cavities of the averse sephiroth , 37 
A legend preserved by the California Indians describes how 
seven mariners — the hohgates — speared a gigantic sea-lion 

3 ‘In Typhonian terms, Daath and the Ain. 

32 i.e. the Abyss. 

33 Ain = Nu Isis = Sirius. See Cults of the Shadow for an explanation of this 
equation. 

3 *Black Holes, p. 112. 

3s See The Confessions ofAleister Crowley. 

36 See The Cults of the Shadow, chapter 9. 

37 See Bertiaux, MSR. Grade Papers, for an account of the flames of the 
sephiroth. 


The Divine Ape 91 

which, in its death-throes, dragged them and their boat 
towards an immense whirlpool which lay to the north-west, 
at the place where souls are sucked down into the under¬ 
world. On the point of disappearing down the funnel of the 
vortex, the rope attaching them to the sea-lion snapped and 
the hohgates floated up to the skies where they were trans¬ 
formed into seven stars. 38 The sea-lion was a form of the 
Typhonian dragon of the abyss, and the region of the whirl¬ 
pool lay in the north-west which is the region traditionally 
assigned to the underworld, north being the realm of 
Typhonian darkness later transferred to the west as the place 
of the sun’s death or disappearance into Amenta. 

This legend pin-points the place of entry into the abyss as 
the depth, tepht or daath, from which the hohgates were 
saved just in time. Their exaltation to the heavens shows the 
transmogrification of the elemental, dark, blind forces of the 
abyss and their conversion into intelligent luminaries that 
were thereafter used as keepers and measurers of time. The 
legend explains the symbolism of the Abyss (Daath) and of 
Heaven (Ain) — the south and north poles of space and time; 
the day- and the night-side of Eden. 

It is interesting here to note the equation of the name 
IHVH with the Supernal Quartenary, Kether-Chokmah- 
Binah-Daath. The Yod (I) equates with Kether, for Yod is 
the supernal flame of consciousness typified by the Pole 
Star. He (H) equates with Chokmah; she is the shakti that 
transmits the light of Yod to Vau (V) via the power-zone of 
Binah; hence He-Vau, Heva, or Eve. 39 

The child of Chokmah and Binah is Daath, the He final or 
‘daughter’ who resumes the formula of Coph Nia.*° Together 

3 8 Bancroft, vol. iii. 177. 

39 Cf. Ta-Urt, lit. ‘Spark-holder’, the name applied by the Egyptians to the 
seven polar stars of Ursa Major. She was the ‘goddess of revolutions’ and her name 
survives in Rota, ‘a wheel’, Taro, the Book of Divining by Astronomical Time- 
Cycles or celestial revolutions, and Tora, the Gate. Athor is also a form of Ta-Urt. 
The name Hat-Hor means literally the ‘womb or house of Hor’ (the child). Taro 
also means ‘law’, ‘principle’, ‘essence’, whence Torah, the ‘law’ of the Jews. 

40 See chapter 7. 





92 


Nigh tside o f Eden 

with Daath the Three Supemals resume the doctrine of the 
Pole or Tree of the Garden, and of the so-called fall through 
Daath. The serpent is implicit in the symbolism of the 
daughter (Coph), the back of the head (qoph), and the ‘evil 
eye’ ( nia ). 


9 


The Negative Way 


THE GIANTS or ‘Fallen Ones’ (Nephilim), also called the 
‘Abortions’, were glyphed by the Ape, which explains the 
connection between the pre-human magical experiment that 
resulted in monkeys, and the Typhonian teratomas des¬ 
cribed by Berosus. The Nephilim were the builders of the 
Tower of Babel, known also as the ‘confusion of tongues’, a 
way of describing the perversion and ultimate loss of the 
Word. Masonic and mystical symbolism, with emphasis on 
the rediscovery of the Word is a mode of re-membering 
Osiris, and thereby of reconstituting the subtle body in the 
Amenta, which means, in psychological terms, the re¬ 
animation of subconscious strata of the psyche. As Massey 
has demonstrated, the Egyptian tradition — particularly in its 
Draconian phase — has preserved intact a veridical account of 
this restoration in the Mysteries of Isis, whose search for the 
phallus of Osiris points directly to the sexual nature of the 
rites connected with her cult. 1 

The correspondences between the Tower, Babel, and 
Babalon, will be explained in due course; here it is necessary 
merely to note that the number of nephilim is 210. Accord¬ 
ing to the qabalistic formula of reversal, 012 describes the 
evolution of number from the ain, 0, through Kether to 

‘See Aleister Crowley & the Hidden God for an initiated interpretation of 
this Mystery. 





94 


Nightside of Eden 

Chokmah. Ain, Kether, and Chokmah, represent the pr im al 
triad: the Great Mother (Ain) and her child (Kether, the 
infinitesimal point), that contains within itself the poten tial 
or creativity typified microcosmically by the phenomenon of 
puberty. Pubescence is the glyph of magical potency in the 
form of a primordial vibration that manifests as the Word of 
Power; hence its attribution to Chokmah, 2, the Sphere of the 
Magus. The Word, represented by the god Hrumakhu, is the 
True Voice attained by the male at puberty; the creative 
vibration par excellence. The withdrawal or reversal of this 
vibration becomes 210, the number of 000, 2 the three phases 
of the Void. It is also the number of ChRB (Cherub), ‘a 
sword’, the symbolism of which has already been explained 
in detail. Above all, 210 is the number of NOX (Notz) the 
Night of Pan’ or the Veil of the Abyss; it is also the number 
of reversal through its equation with BQBVQ, ‘a bottle’, 
from the Egyptian Baakabaka 3 meaning ‘upside down’ or 
‘topsy turvy’. Again, 210 is the number of ADHR, the ‘First 
Adam’, which is significant in view of the symbolism relating 
to the Draconian interpretation of the Mysteries presented 
here. Most significantly, however, 210 is the number of 
three words denoting the other side of the Tree, viz: AChAR, 
the ‘back or hind quarter’, a name for the hidden passages or 
tunnels of Set; ARChA, ‘way’; and ARChA 4 (Orach), the 
‘feminine period’ (whence oracle ), or ‘tears of the left eye’, 
the backward looking or inner vision. In Sanskrit the word 
Arksha means ‘regulated by the stars’, and Arke in the Greek 
Mysteries was the Mother of the Gods. Compare the sym¬ 
bolism of Nuit arched over the earth or crouched on all 
fours in an attitude of bringing to birth. Finally, HRH, ‘to 

conceive’also has the value of 210. 5 

The symbolism of the tower is depicted in Atu XVI. 6 The 

2 0 = Ayin = 70; 000 = 210. 

3 Cf. Bacbuc, The Oracle of the Bottle (Rabelais). 

^ The orach of women’ is applied to the female period in Gen. xviii. 11. 

««. ,L°r£ w 't£“" b " °* Mn * PT »■'•< 

6 See The Book of Thoth, by Aleister Crowley. 


95 


The Negative Way 

Tower of Babel erected by a pre-human (i.e. non-human) 
agency is one with the Zebulah or Tower of Heaven, which, 
by Gematria, is 44, the number of the mystical waters of the 
Abyss, i.e. DM, ‘blood’, the blood of the oracn ; the blood or 
abyss from which man — ADM — emerged. 

The ruler of the Abyss is Af-Ra who is depicted in the 
Book of the Dead as a headless god. He is featured in a 
magical papyrus 7 as ‘the Bomless One’, i.e. the Holy Guardian 
Angel. The headless god is the god in the abyss, the sun at 
night. He was later typified by the three-quarter cross or T of 
the Initiates, the Sun-Son in the Abyss separated from 0, his 
mother, the complete symbol being ® , and then © , when 
the cross or crossing of the four quarters 8 had been evolved 
in time from the Abyss of Space, 0. 

The full symbolism of the Beast (Ape) and Babalon 
(Babel) can be explicated only when it is brought into relation 
with the symbolism of the Tower, the Word, and the Headless 
God who in mystical terminology is the Holy Guardian Angel, 
which, as Mathers interpreted it, is the Bomless One, the 
subconsciousness, infinite potential, the latent light, the 
hidden god, the sun-son in Amenta. He is the god that does 
not emerge from the abyss because, as Hoor-paar-Kraat or 
Set, he is potentiality implicit in the child, and thus the 
precursor of the True Voice. He is not the Ever-Coming One, 
but the Never-Coming One, the noumenal source of appear¬ 
ance and, therefore, the vertiable disappearance and absence 
that makes all phenomenal presence possible. He can never 
come, or appear, because the moment he does so he is no 
longer reality, but an objective illusion, a mere appearance. 

It is necessary here to advert to the sequence of the Aeons 
as formulated in the Western Mystery Tradition. A Grand 
Cycle comprises seven aeons (0-6). Terrestrial beings are at 
present in the sixth, which is numbered five. This is the Aeon 
of Homs, or Thelema. Its formula is atomic and disintegrative. 

1 A Fragment of a Graeco-Egyptian Work upon Magic, translated by C. W. 
Goodwin. 

8 i.e. two equinoces and the two solstices. 






96 Nightside of Eden 

The final Aeon, 6, which is numbered seven, is the Aeon of 
Maat, the Aeon of the daughter ( Coph ), as the present aeon is 
that of the son. 9 

Gerald Massey has noted 10 that the hexad (6) was held by 
Pythagoras to be the perfect sacred number; it was called 
Venus. Interpreted in the light of the numbers 5 and 6, Horns 
and Maat signify respectively the Sun and Nu-Isis; the son 
and the daughter; the vau-he of Tetragrammaton. But it is 
an error to consider Horns in terms of the masculine formula. 
The number of the Aeon of Horns is 5, which, as the penta¬ 
gram or stellar radiation, is ‘the perfect female number in 
accordance with the left and negative hand’. 11 The firsthand, 
or hold, was the womb, and the figure of 5 became symbolic 
of the womb not only because of the affinity of the hand and 
hold but because of the 5 days associated with time and 
feminine periodicity. Hence 5 is also the number of glamour 
and illusion and thus of magic, with which the pentagram is 
inevitably identified. The number six, on the contrary, is the 
number of Maat as the Goddess of Truth because six is 
synonymous with sex and the formula of going again after 
the flowing of the blood which caused an arrest or eclipse of 
the creative light. Six is the number of breath or air, as five 
is that of water or blood, hence Scorpio is attributed to six 
as the sign of dry land which appeared after the flood or 
deluge typified by the number five. 

Horns (5) represents disintegration; Maat (6) re-integration, 
or the attainment of firm ground, the apotheosis of ultimate 

9 It may be of use to students of magick to note here the practical difference 
between the son and the daughter in connection with sexual magick and the for¬ 
mula of IHVH. In the IX 0 the Yod and the He combine and the child of then- 
union is Ra-Hoor-Khuit, the Son (Le. the universe). In the XI° the child produced 
of the magical union is Hoor-paar-Kraat - the daughter who is the gateway to 
the anti-univeise. (Cf. ‘blue-lidded daughter of sunset’. Sunset denotes Amenta.) 
The son ‘earths’ the current in Malkuth (the universe); the daughter, however, 
makes possible a further series of operations by virtue of her receptivity to all 
vibrations. She is the Gate to Universe *B\ Hence the superiority of the XI° and 
the importance of the Formula of Dream Control. (See Cults of the Shadow, 
chapter 11. 

10 The Natural Genesis, vol. 2, page 282. 

1 'Ibid, page 274. 


The Negative Way 97 

reification after the dissolution effected by the Aeon of 
Horus. But it should be remembered that these numbers con¬ 
stantly interact. The Aeon of Maat, numbered 6, is actually 
the seventh in series from the first aeon which emanated 
from the Abyss. The daughter is finally re-integrated with 
and as the Mother, the primal Goddess of the Seven Stars 
(souls) who attains her zenith or height in the eighth . This is 
not a material entity but a dissolution (pralaya) following 
upon the entire series of outbreathings or aeons in one com¬ 
plete cycle of time ( mahakala ). 

Frater Achad was under the impression that the Aeon of 
Maat has already dawned, 12 but AL hints that her advent 
will occur at some future time. Time, however, has reference 
only to phenomenal existence, and it is possible that certain 
Adepts 13 have already realized the advent of Maat in those 
dimensions beyond time and space that are represented by 
the sephiroth of the other side of the Tree. 

The earliest type of the Tree was feminine and it was 
represented by the Asherah (Ash tree). This was a universal 
type and Crowley hymns the ‘sap of the world-ash, Wonder 
Tree!’ in the Gnostic Mass which he composed in Russia in 
1915. 14 The Asherah was a figure of three; three and tree are 
symbolically synonymous as the tfee of three from which the 
earliest family appeared in the form of the Mother and her 
child wo became the pubescent male and the bull of his 
mother. The type was perpetuated in Ancient Egypt. This 
family tree was the oldest and it preceded the trinity of 
Father, Mother, Child,* for it emaned from a phase that ante¬ 
dated the role of paternity in society. 

The Tree, being a glyph of the total, also symbolized a 
complete cycle of time represented by the number 30 which, 
by shape, suggests the Hindu creative mantra 3P (OM). The 
numbers chiefly associated with the feminine tree or Asherah 

1 I See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 8. 

13 There is, for instance a Cult of Maat in Ohio, U.S.A., formed of Adepts who 
are currently chanelling Maatian radiations from an, as yet, remote Aeon. 

14 See The Ship (Crowley), Equinox, I. x. 



98 Nightside of Eden 

are 10, 7, and 13, all of which are connected with the 
feminine Mysteries. Ten is the number of Men, an Egyptian 
word meaning a ‘memorial’, the ‘period of illness’, a ‘liquid 
measure’; and the number Ten or Meni. Meni was the Syrian 
lunar goddess. Asher also signifies ten, and the tree is the 
feminine figure of ten or total, as the three, as already 
explained. Thirteen is the number of female periods in a 
lunar year of thirteen months of 28 days. Ten such periods 
constituted the time of gestation and the Tree resumed the 
ten dry and the three wet phases of the total cycle of creation. 
Later, the ten were symbolized as ten fruits and ten sephiroth, 
the three supemals being separated from the inferior seven by 
the Waste of the Abyss which is crossed by the thirteenth 
path. 1 s 

One is the Mother; two, the child; three, the pubescent 
male. Typhon and Set-Horus thus represent the tree of the 
two phases of destruction and creation; negation and affir¬ 
mation; menstruation and gestation. Ten, seven, and thirteen 
make the complete cycle of thirty: the ten that is thirty by 
three, the primordial triad evolving the Tree of Ten Fruit 
(Sephiroth). 

The Mystery of the Ten is then the mystery at the heart of 
the primordial Draconian Cult of the Goddess. And although 
the symbolism refers to the origin of the known universe, 
there are reasons to suppose that the Cult was aware of 
another universe, altogether unknown — the One beyond Ten 
— the ELEVENTH. This later became typed as the number 
not only of Daath, but of negative phases of being rep¬ 
resented by the qliphoth. The Mystery of Eleven was con¬ 
cealed by the Draconians under the numbers 5 and 6, five 
being the left or feminine aspect of shakti, and six its positve 
side. Together, these two are 56. In AL (I. 24), Nuit declares 
her Word as six and fifty. This is the Word of Nu, whose 
number is 56. Its full symbol pertains to the pentagram and 
the hexagram and the magical word Abrahadabra which is the 
formula of the Great Work: the union of the five and the six. 

1 s i.e. the path ascribed to the Moon. See Diagram of Tree of Life. 


The Negative Way 99 

The Great Work has hitherto been considered as a work of 
synthesis, but it is more properly speaking the result of that 
supreme ‘dissolution, and eternal ecstasy in the kisses of Nu’ 
of which Hadit speaks in chapter II (verse 44). 16 But in order 
to understand the nature of the dissolution and the ecstasy it 
is necessary to understand the nature of eleven as the ‘one 
beyond ten’, in the sense that it is the One — or Yoni — 
beyond the Veil of the Abyss; i.e. the yoni on the other side 
of the Tree. 

The number 5 was sacred to the Goddess on account of 
the physiological formula of her earthly representatives; it 
was also the number of one hand, the left, which wasprimary. 
This was the hand or hold of the Mother, as explained. The 
left or under-hand became, in the solar (post-Draconian cults) 
the inferior and infernal hand, and was therefore ascribed by 
the solarites to the Left Hand Path, that sinister Path that 
exalted the female principle and recognized it as primordial. 

The number six (i.e. the right hand), represented the solar 
and masculine power, and the sixth digit — after taking into 
account the five of the left hand — was the thumb of the 
right. This typified the phallus and sex (six), not only because 
the phallus is the copula, but primarily because it typified 
the beginning of a new series after the dissolution caused by 
the Draconian eclipse. 17 

Massey declares that the ‘two great and hidden secrets of 
the ancient wisdom were those of times and numbers, 
especially in relation to feminine periodicity, which explains 
the motive for keeping the nature of the gnosis concealed.’ 18 
This is true, up to a point, although, as previously noted, no 
mere consideration of sexual mechanics would have 
occasioned so much reticence on the part of the ancients, 
who were not at all squeamish where nature was concerned. 


16 Note the number of this verse, 44 = DM = blood. 

17 i.e. the periodic eclipse that was the biological basis of such concepts as 
pralaya and the Night of Time. 

18 The Natural Generis (Massey), vol. II, p. 300. 



100 Nightside of Eden 

The squeamishness came later, in the wake of the solar 
cults. 19 To the original Gnostics, as to the pagans, nature 
gave no cause for shame, subterfuge or concealment. About 
what, then, was all the secrecy, for that every effort was 
made to conceal the primal gnosis, no one who has studied 
the subject will deny? The reason surely is to be found in the 
fact that primitive man was a natural sensitive. The ghost or 
astral double was as real to him then as it is as unreal to the 
average man of today. Similarly, primitive man intuited the 
existence of that unknown Universe ‘B’ on the other side of 
the Tree, with the Abyss (Choronzon) as its copula. An 
understanding therefore of the numbers five, six, and fiftysix 
provides a squint at the machinery of the primitive min d 
working in the presence of elemental powers shrouded 
beneath a double veil of awe and of horror. This supreme 
dread was inspired by the metaphysical certainty (i.e. the 
original gnosis) that the phenomenal world is but the mani¬ 
festation of subjectivity or non-manifestation, and that the 
physiological formula of the female somehow adumbrated 
the mechanics of an awful mystery that was unknowable by 
the mind in its normal state. This mystery, refined by aeon- 
long ages of time survives today in the form of ancient myths, 
in the Tantras of certain Far Eastern Schools, and in Ch’an 
Buddhism, that curious compound of the Sunyavada 20 and 
the Taoism of ancient China. 

Whereas whole numbers denoted the ‘gods’, 21 fractions of 
numbers were traditionally ascribed to ‘demons’. 22 Lenor- 
mant, for instance, has shown 23 that {- or were the seven 
Maskim or ‘ensnarers’: ‘seven spirits of the abyss . . . which 
surpassed all the others in power and in terror’. They were 
Typhonian demons whose power in relation to the gods is 
that of five to six, or, as Massey puts it: ‘the highest number 

j 9 Hinduism in its eshatalogical phase, Judaism in its secondary phase, and 
Christianity in all its phases. 

20 The Path of the Void. 

21 Creative energies and elemental functional forces. 

22 Negative forces;hence nocturnal, infernal or demonic. 

23 Chaldean Magic (Lenormant) pp. 25, 26, 27. 


The Negative Way 101 

on the left hand to the first one on the right’. 24 In Hebrew, 
Yod means ‘hand’, and its number is ten (denoting both 
hands), which was primarily the number of the Goddess. The 
zoomorphic image of Yod — the lion-serpent — shows the 
combination of the female (lunar) dragon or serpent, and the 
solar-phallic lion. Crowley interpreted this symbolism as the 
spermatozoon; the lion-headed serpent swimming in its fluid 
menstruum. 

Kep (Egyptian), the left hand, is the Hebrew Kaph, the 
‘palm of the hand’. In Egypt the kaf ape was assigned to the 
hand as the zootypical holder, handler, or fashioner of the 
pre-human creation. 25 The qoph symbolism is also relevant. 
Qoph = the ‘back of the head’; the head = Resh, the Sun; 
therefore the back of the head {qoph) = the Moon. This sym¬ 
bolism is assumed to Koph or Coph, the daughter of the Dark 
Sun or Black Flame. 26 

Plutarch states 27 that the followers of Pythagoras con¬ 
sidered Set-Typhon to be a demon power produced ‘in an 
even proportion of numbers’, viz: in that of 56. In this they 
agreed with Eudoxus that the ‘property of fifty-six apper¬ 
tains to Set-Typhon’. Massey 28 glosses this with the remark 
that the ‘even proportion of numbers, to wit, fifty-six’ would 
‘also include the 5 x 6 or thirty days of the moon, which was 
like-wise the time of Typhon’. Furthermore, the figure 5 is 
by shape the crooked sword or sickle of Saturn (Kronus); it 
was, originally the symbol of the Goddess of the Seven 
Stars 29 as the cutter-off or divider of time in heaven, as the 
Mother was the divider into two,into three,into many, on earth. 

24 The name of Typhon as Kep is that of the left hand, which is the emblem 
of the female and the number five. 

2s The Nephilim, giants, apes, etc. 

2 6 The Dark Sun (Son) is Set. For the Black Flame, see Liber Pennae Prae- 
numbra (Donat per Omni; Scriba - Nema, 1974) issued by the Cult of Maat, now 
operating in Ohio, U.S.A., and which is, as far as I am aware, the only body of 
Initiates to channel the influence of this current which Frater Achad was among 
the first to adumbrate. 

21 Of Isis and Osiris. 

2 *The Natural Genesis, II 302. 

2 9 The Great Bear Constellation of which the planetary representative was 



102 Nightside of Eden 

The figure five, then, represents the annihilation of time, 
as the five day period abolishes or eclipses the creative spirit. 
The latter, in turn, is represented by the number six, which 
is the figure nought with a tail added, indicating the negation 
of the five-day period; its ‘tail end’. This is followed by the 
number seven, represented by the index finger of the right 
hand, which signifies the course of time resumed. 

In the Egyptian hieroglyphics the sign of 7 is the sign of a 
god, symbolized by the axe (neter J), the axe being the 
weapon of Set, the opener of the Mother. In the language of 
the secret gnosis 30 Set is identical with his mother, hence his 
name Sept or Set, means seven. The number seven indicated 
the time for resuming sexual relations with the woman, and, 
in the symbology of the later Mysteries, it was attributed to 
the goddess Venus. 31 

It is necessary to burrow deeper, even than the primordial 
physical gnosis, to come to grips with the Mysteries it sym¬ 
bolizes. This can be done only by re-casting and reversing our 
mental machinery, for if we would penetrate the ultimate 
mystery we must not think positively, or even negatively — 
we must not think at all! The Cha’an Adepts of the East, and 
Aiwass through Crowley in the West, tirelessly pointed out 
the Negative Way, the Via Negationis, the Way that negates, 
the Way of Nuit whose number is eleven, whose word is 56, 
and whose Mysteries are typified by the ‘five pointed star’. 

The Word or Logos of the male is secondary, a reflection 
or glamour, a positive and therefore phenomenal manifes¬ 
tation, whereas the Word of Nuit, being soundless, contains 
the potential of all words and of the No-Word of the One 
beyond Ten. This is the Ain which is typified by the Kaf-ape, 
the dumb beast that forms one half (a fraction) of Choron- 
zon. The other half is Babalon, whose eye (ayin) is made full 
by the Ape of Thoth (Daath) — the bestial and therefore 
speechless generator of a world of glamour and illusion. Such 

30 i.e. the physical gnosis. 

31 The original seven - as in the symbolism of the World-Ash with its Mys¬ 
teries of 7, 10, and IS — was represented by the goddess of the seven stars, the 
primal time-keeper or clock in the heavens. 


The Negative Way 103 

is the mystery of the One beyond Ten, the symbol of which 
is the Sword ( Zain ), the sickle (^) which, as a figure of 5, 
had as its prototype the mother who bifurcated into two. 
Time was thus divided into parts or numbers which represent 
the multitude of concepts generated by the ceaseless revolu¬ 
tion of the Kalachakra . 3 2 

The five, the six, the seven, and the ten, of the Tree as a 
totality, constitute the mystical numbers of the lunar year 
with its cycle of thirteen months, each of twenty-eight days. 
Hence, according to Talmudic lore: ‘There is one day of the 
year on which Satan is powerless, this is the day of Yom 
Kipour; on the 364 other days 33 he is all-potent’. The com¬ 
mentator ascribes this to the fact that the qabalistic value of 
Satan, 34 364, is identified with so many days. During these 
days ‘Satan has the power to do evil, but on the day of 
Kipour he is impotent’. 

The most significant factor here is that of impotence. The 
Greek word Akrasia is the qabalistic equivalent of Choronzon, 
333. Choronzon is impotent in the sense that behind the 
Veil of the Abyss nothing is generated, for it is the domain of 
the Negative. It is however significant that 333, the number 
of Choronzon, of Shugal, and of Akrasia, is short of 364 — 
the number of Satan — by 31, the number of AL, LA, and 
Set. 35 AL, LA, and Set form the primal trinity which as 93 
(31 x 3) is Aiwass, and the key to the mystery of Non-being 
and of the Via Negationis expounded in The Book of the 
Law. 36 

The number 28 derived its magical significance from the 
cyclic lunation of the human female with its thirteen mani- 

32 The kalachakra is the Wheel of Kali, i.e. Time. In The Book of Thoth, the 
wheel is depicted in Atu XX (q.v.) with Typhon and the Ape of Thoth revolving 
on its rim. This atu is ascribed to the letter kaph (20), meaning the ‘palm of the 
hand' the symbolism of which has already been explained. Vide supra. 

33 28 x 13 = 364. 

34 ShHTN = 364. 

3 s ShT (Set) is 31 by Tarot because SAin is attributed to Atu XX and 7eth to 
Atu XI; XX + XI = XXXI. 

36 364 is also the number of AVD MVTLA, ‘the Hidden Light’, which deter¬ 
mines the nature of the God hidden in the Abyss, viz: Satan. 




104 Nigh tside of Eden 

festations per year. This physiological phenomenon supplied 
the canon of the celestial moon of 2914 days. It was the 
fractional element that stigmatized the lunar cults in the eyes 
of the later solarites, and the cumulative impact of astro¬ 
nomical observations rendered accursed the primal supremacy 
of the mother upon earth. But as already noted, the primary 
facts of physiological phenomena were not in themselves 
sufficient to account for the dread with which the later cults 
viewed them. Such tabus were the masks of mysteries in¬ 
finitely more abhorrent, when it was suspected that the 
phenomenal universe was a mere glamour symbolised by 
Eden. The ‘fall’ consisted in accepting the delusion at its face 
value. The initiates, the gnostics, knew — perhaps intuitively 
- that reality lay somewhere beyond or behind the total 
negation of this glamour. At this point in evolution (and no 
one can say precisely when it occurred) the qliphoth became 
active in human consciousness. They typified the shadow, 
the dark, the non-manifest, absence, the total dis-appearance 
of the phenomenal world. 

According to the Book of the Dead , Set is the child of 
Nu. 37 The serpent also is her child. 38 She therefore who is 
56 (Nu) embodies the 5 and 6 as dual polarities, and they 
denote the magical mode of her worship. She is it of whom 
it is written 39 that the Scarlet Woman Babalon ‘shall see and 
strike at the worship of Nu; she shall achieve Hadit’. This 
means that she will achieve or fulfil herself through Set, for 
Nu comprises Nuit and Babalon and is therefore identical 
with Typhon, the mother of Set. Baba, the root of Babalon, 
is a title of Typhon. The bab or bail is the entrance of the 
void, pit, or abyss. The Coptic bebi signifies to flow and to 
overflow. Bab is also the BHV (13) Bohu, the void upon 
which the mystical genesis is based. 40 The Bab is also called 
‘the Gate’ (of outrance as well as entrance). Because the gate 
could be used both ways, i.e. entered or left, the Babisi were 

3 ’Chapter lxxxv. 

3 8 Chapter cviii. 

3 ’.42., 111,45. 

40 Cf. Tohu and Bohu. 


The Negative Way 105 

known as the hells in the heavens . 4 1 Typhon was the Tepht 
or Depth, the hole of the Serpent of the abyss f 2 In ancient 
Australian rituals the typhe or tupe was a pit over which 
magical spells were chanted against demons dwelling in the 
abyss of darkness. 43 Sufficient has now been adduced to 
show that one of the earliest terrors registered by the ancients 
in myth and legend was an invasion by the dark forces of the 
abyss. This dread lay at the root of Jill the rituals and exor¬ 
cisms ever evolved. The magician’s protective barrier began 
with the concept of a pit, hole, or magic circle constructed 
with intent to ward off invasion from ‘outside’, from beyond 
the veil. The veil was that which shrouded the abyss. In 
primeval times it was not as dense as it later became when 
man lost contact with his elemental origins. Yet there is 
proof that not all magical ritual was designed to repel the 
dark forces; some were designed specifically to draw them 
into the ambience of the human life-wave. Details of such 
processes were destroyed with such thoroughness by the anti- 
Typhonians that no complete formulae have survived. Hints 
only may be gleaned from corrupt mediaevel treatises on 
alchemy and the grimoires of sorcery. Curiously enough it 
is in rabbinical lore that we obtain fleeting yet vivid glimpses 
of a dark world of anti-matter; adumbrations, it would seem, 
of those of which we are today being made uncomfortably 
aware and which we are glimpsing through an ever widening 
rift in the veil created by a new sorcery, a new gnosis, known 
as nuclear science. 

41 The heavens were depicted as Nu, the waters of space; i.e. the night-sky. 

42 Cf. the Hebrew Tophet; ‘in the valley’. 

4 3 Massey, Natural Genesis II, 463. 




10 


Adumbrations ofMaat 


IN The Magical Revival I drew attention to a similarity 
between the situation that faced the ancient initiates and that 
which confronts humanity today. This situation is developing 
a massive though still largely subconscious sensing of oppres¬ 
sive influence from outside which — as Crowley has observed 1 
is finding expression in the ‘nightmare fear of catastrophe, 
against which we are yet half unwilling to take precautions’. 

Innumerable books have appeared within the past two 
decades concerning what are now considered to be highly 
probable instances of periodic invasions of this planet by 
extra-terrestrial entities. Very few such books offer a shred of 
convincing evidence in support of this theses; among those 
that do may be numbered The Sirius Mystery, by Robert 
Temple, which has the virtue of revealing to the public the 
existence of an African tribe with an unbroken tradition of 
an extra-terrestrial visitation that has endured for more than 
10,000 years. 2 The Sirius Mystery is related profoundly to 
the Typhonian Tradition which my Trilogy has treated 
exhaustively. 

‘Sec introduction to the pocket-edition of Liber AL published by the O.T.O. 
in 1938. 

2 See The Sirius Mystery (Robert Temple), Sidgwick & Jackson, 1976. The 
interested reader may note the recurrence in Temple’s books of key Typhonian 
concepts and themes dealt with in my Trilogy, and, perfiaps above all, the con¬ 
firmation of the locus of origin of the Typhonian Tradition in the A.'. A.', or 
Argenteum Astrum (Silver Star) which I identified with Sothis in 1972. See The 
Magical Revival, etc. 


Adumbrations ofMaat 107 

H. P. Blavatsky’s writings were undoubtedly the source of 
inspiration for a vast amount of present-day literature based 
upon the supposition that several past evolutions of the life- 
wave on this planet had foundered owing to some dire 
accident or misuse of occult knowledge. Yet Blavatsky, and 
Crowley, who in a certain sense continued her work, claimed 
to be transmitters only, of extra-terrestrial Intelligence. The 
Book of Dzyan is probably the most complete transmission 
we have concerning the mysteries of pre-human creations, 
and The Book of Thoth - in the form of the curious hieratic 
glyphs knowns as the Tarot — resumes the practical means 
whereby this Intelligence, and the currents which it embodies, 
may be invoked and channelled by Adepts competent to 
direct the forces which it represents. Dion Fortune’s The 
Cosmic Doctrine claims to be another such body of non¬ 
human transmission. Among contemporary Adepts, Michael 
Bertiaux of the Black Snake Cult has transmitted and earthed 
a transmundane current in his Grade Papers pertaining to the 
Monastery of the Seven Rays. 3 And Soror Nema (Margaret 
Cook) in Ohio is a focus of the Forces of Maat. 4 

The 22 Atus of Thoth undoubtedly contain fragments of 
the ‘forbidden wisdom’, or hidden lore, which the post- 
Typhonians sought to abolish. Yet with the first nuclear 
explosion that occurred on this planet during the present 
life-wave, the door again swung open and emanations of the 
Abyss have been pouring into the earth’s astral atmosphere 
ever since. The resulting charge of qliphotic energy is building 
up so rapidly that those only are immune from contagion 
who can enter Nu’s ark as totally polarized beings. Such 
beings were symbolized by the androgyne of the ancient 
teachings, from the Indian Ardhaniswari to the bi-sexual 
Baphomet of the Templars. 

It is suggested by the authors of The Dawn of Magic 5 that 
a certain region of the Gobi desert bears the scars of a nuclear 

3 See Cults of the Shadow, chapters 9 and 10. 

4 See chapter 11. 

5 Louis Pauwels and Jacques Bergier. 




108 


Nightside of Eden 


explosion. In the Chaldean account of the contest between 
Bel and the dragon, the solar deity arms himself with the 
sword ( zatn ) of the four quarters which turned four ways. 
The sword, brandished and in motion, is equivalent to the 
fylfot of Thor the Thunderer, or the Swastika of Agni the 
Fire God. Bel ‘slays the dragon, and when the struggle is over 
it is said that the eleven tribes poured in after the battle in 
great multitudes coming to gaze at the monstrous serpent. 
The word eleven is distinctly written istin-isrit or one and 
ten so that there can be no doubt about the number, 
although nothing is known of the eleven tribes’. 7 Massey’s 
explanation is that these eleven tribes represent the eleven 
zodiacal signs previously founded, and that the death of the 
dragon occurred in the twelfth, as the ultimate sign of the 
final solar zodiac, viz: Pisces. But the eleventh sign alone is 
sufficient to explain the parable, for Aquarius typifies the 
watery abyss of space where the dragon (Draconis) was slain 
or sank down to Amenta, when the solar ascendancy over the 
stellar time-keepers was finalised. Alternatively, the eleven 
refers to Daath as the place of death and the place of the 
eighth, i.e. the Beast or Dragon. This can be interpreted as 
the place through which the dragon of darkness dropped to 
the ‘other side’. 

Nuit or Nu arched over the earth, as depicted in the Stele 
of Revealing, 8 is the Egyptian glyph of Nu’s or Noah’s Ark 
that contained a pair of each member of the animal creation 
with the exception of certain beasts that the later cults 
banished as Typhonian, i.e. ‘unclean’. They were excluded 
from the ark not - as the legends imply - because of their 
hybrid or impure nature but because they were exempted on 
account of being symbolic embodiments of a successful 
crossing from the hither to the other side of the flood that 
typified the abyss. 

the ‘ one beyond ten’. (Note by present author). 

ILs£T* ° f th ° PaSt ’ VOL K> P ' 136 ’ qUoted b V Masse V i" Natural 
8 See The Magical Revival, plate 7. 


Adumbrations ofMaat 109 

The legend of Noah, distorted in the Hebrew version as 
also in its Greek analogue, the myth of Deucalion, yet pre¬ 
serves traces of the true gnosis that was all but obliterated 
ages before the commencement of the monumental period of 
Egypt’s history. 

The five and the six (56) that is the Word of Nu (Not) is 
the key to the ark and of the arch. This is expressed qabalis- 
tically in the 5 x 6 = 30 of the Gnostics, or the $p of the 
Hindus, the Word or Vibration of the Not, the Ain, the Eye 
of the Seven (i.e. Set). 9 Furthermore, 5 + 6 = 11, is the 
number of the magick of change or transformation 10 because 
it is the number of Nuit who says: ‘My number is 11, as all 
their numbers who are of us’. I have noted elsewhere that ‘us’ 
(66) is a glyph of the qliphoth which the Jews did not under¬ 
stand and which they therefore categorized as shells of the 
dead, demons, and the gillulim or excrementitious deities. 11 
The truth of the matter is the truth of the mater (mother), 
Nu, and it lies physically in that excrementitious manifesta¬ 
tion stigmatized by the Jews and Persians particularly, and 
abhorred of those who were unaware of its alchemical value. 
The sole surviving repositories of these mysteries are, it seems, 
certain South Indian tantras, the works of ancient Tamil 
Adepts, and certain secret Arab treaties veiled in the obscurity 
of a mystical terminology more elaborate and baffling even 
than the alchemical texts familiar to Western students. 
Destiny or chance - call it what you will - placed at my 
disposal a rare commentary on a Tantric work by an 
exponent of the Chandrakala recension of the Vamachara 
division of Tantras, which contains clear references to the 
magical use of those psycho-physical elements that were cast 
out ( vama ) and anathematized solely on account of a religious 

^ITie ‘seven’ is Z; hence z-ain, the Sword that effects the dissolution of Time. 
i.e. of death and of the ‘dissolution and eternal ecstasy in the kisses of Nu’. 
(Al. II. 44). 

11 For example the menstruating Merodach, sneeringly alluded to as the 
‘delicate Merodach* by the Septuagint. See also Isaiah xlvi, 12 where the En^i-h 
translation is rendered vaguely and inaccurately, not deliberately perhaps but 
because the translators also could not fathom the meaning of the qliphoth. 



110 Nightside of Eden 

prejudice caused by a revolution in methods of chronology. 12 
The change-over of types and symbols has been exhaustively 
explained by Gerald Massey in his monumental work, but 
what has not been clarified by him is the fact of magical 
potency possessed by the essences, the kalas, the flowers or 
emanations symbolized by the divinities - always feminine - 
of the primordial pantheon. Yet, despite the limitation 
imposed upon Massey in respect of the lack of initiated texts 
available in his time, his work remains of the utmost value 
in that it traces more accurately than does that of any other 
writer, before or since, the line of emergence, the evolution 
and history of the symbolic vehicles of the Typhonian Cur¬ 
rent which the present writer has sought to explain in all his 
writings. With the exception of Sir John Woodroffe and 
Aleister Crowley, no western writer, other than Massey, has 
touched upon the vital content of the genuine gnosis, the 
true magical tradition. For, there is absolutely no doubt that 
there resides in the subtle effluvia of certain magically charged 
vaginal vibrations the alchemical substance or essence which, 
correctly extracted and imbibed, can so transform the human 
body-mind complex as to render it capable of fulfilling the 
definition of magick by ‘causing change to occur in con¬ 
formity with will; 13 The magical methods of achieving this 
have been given — up to a certain point — in Crowley’s 
writings, but in very few other works hitherto published in 
the West, always excepting a few translations of Sanskrit and 
Tibetan texts presented by Sir John Woodroffe. 14 It is there¬ 
fore my particular aim to provide the ‘missing link’ in 
Massey’s work by supplying Tantric references that not only 
explain the Draconian Tradition, but that also bring that 

1 J Chronos: whence chronology. The Kronotypes were intelligent time keepers 
as opposed to the pre-kronian and elementary forces of space. These forces were 
first typified zodmorphically, or totemically, as Elementaries of Chaos (Space) 
before being born into Cosmos (Order, and therefore Time) where they were 
continued in the stellar phase of mythology as symbols of the constellations, i.e. 
as celestial time keepers. 

13 Magick (Crowley), p. 131. 

14 See particularly The Demchog Tantra, KarpuracUstotra, Kamakalavilasa, 
Anandalahari, Kulamavatantra, etc. 


Adumbrations of Maat 111 

tradition into line with the primordial psycho-physiological 
gnosis which, after having bridged the devastating gap made 
by the solarites, leads right on to the New Gnosis that science 
today is slowly revealing. 15 

It should now be abundantly plain that the Mystery of the 
Abyss, the Gate of the Abyss, the Door of Daath, etc., are 
no mere literary devices. The symbolism of the gate of 
ingress, as of egress, typified by Babalon comports the 
implications contained in the tantras already mentioned, 
implications that were suppressed or distorted by the post- 
Typhonians yet which lingered on obscurely in the writings 
of the gnostics with their allusions to the love-feasts and 
eucharistic rites of Charis anathematized by the Christians, 
who fostered the myth of a carnalized Christ. 

The symbolism of the Abyss pervades all ancient magical 
traditions and mythologies. The Finns, for instance, referred 
to their magicians as ‘Abysses’, and the Abbesses of a certain 
Tibetan Buddhist Cult bore the title Dorje Phagmo, meaning 
‘eternal’ or ‘adamantine sow’, the sow being a primordial 
Typhonian type of the Goddess as the sower or genetrix. 

The legends of the Twins of Light and Dark — Horus and 
Set which can be interpreted as the Right and Left (or Front 
and Back) of the Tree, resume the doctrine of the negative 
and positive polarities of the creative current: day and night, 
male and female, the double lunation, 16 or the double 
horizon. 17 This polarity is represented anthropomorphically 
as the child Set, the impubescent boy, and the man Horus, 
the virile male. But note that in the symbolism of the gnosis 
the impubescent one was the type of potential. Being neither 
male nor female it was the accepted symbol of both, or beth, 
the two, the twin who was One as the Magus 18 with his twin 

15 See in this connection Fritjof Capra’s stimulating and suggestive work, The 
Tao of Physics: An Exploration of the Parallels between Modem Physics and 
Eastern Mysticism. (Wildwood House, 1975). 

16 Waxing and waning of the moon. 

17 The Spring and Autumn equinoces. 

18 Atu One is attributed to Beth, The Magician. Beth being both, is therefore 
also neither. See ch. 2, supra. 



112 


Nightside of Eden 

force or potentiality. Massey notes that the legend of the 
Twins — Set-Horus — was pre-monumental and ‘belonged to 
the time of the Shus-en-Har, to whom an historical period of 
13, 420 years is assigned’. This computation he notes ‘has 
since been corroborated by the inscriptions discovered at 
Sakkarah’. 19 

But prior even to the Cult of the Twins, ancient as it is, 
the Cult of the Trinity, or Three in One, existed with the 
Mother Typhon as the primordial source of creation who 
contained within herself the child (Set) whose potential was 
actualized as Horns. This triple character was assigned to the 
Moon of Hecate, and the Jews also preserve the tradition in 
their earliest formulation of the Tree where it yet remains 
under the forms of Daath, Yesod, and Malkuth. Daath was 
the cosmic moon and the source of the illusion of pheno- 
menality, i.e. the ego; Yesod was the astral or celestial moon, 
the moon of magick and witchcraft; Malkuth was the physical 
moon that generated glamours on the earth plane. Malkuth 
was thus the densest aspect of the trinity and the reification 
of the moon in the human female. Daath is to the Supernal 
Triad what Yesod is to the Infernal Triad, and it is significant 
that the qliphotic image which the Jews assigned to Yesod 
was that of Gamaliel, the Obscene Ass. 

According to Sharpe 20 the head of the ass is an Egyptian 
hieroglyphic determinative having the numeral equivalent of 
30, which shows its relationship to the lunar current and the 
month of 30 days divided into three parts, each of ten days. 
But it is in the Persian texts that we meet with the ass that 
may be considered obscene. It has three legs or members, the 
third being the phallus, with which it purifies the ocean of 
salt. ‘When it stales in the ocean all the sea-water will become 
purified’. The purgative power of urine is well known in 
Asia, 21 but there is another, more esoteric form of purifica- 

19 The Natural Genesis, vol. II, p. 473. See also The Magical Revival, chapter 3. 

20 Egyptian Inscriptions, lxxiii, 7. 

21 In India, for instance, cow’s urine has from time immemorial been used in 
the cure of snakebite. 


113 


Adumbrations ofMaat 

tion known to the Tantrics which requires an imbition of the 
urine of the preistess chosen to represent the Goddess in the 
rites of the Kalachakra. 22 In the Bundahish the waters are 
identified with time, and the ass is the ‘special assistant of 
Sothis in keeping correct time, or in preserving the waters 
pure by his micturation, which destroys the creatures of 
corruption.’ 23 In other words, the qliphoth are repulsed and 
annihilated by the Star of Set who, with his assistant the ass, 
purges the abyss of the teratomas spawned by Typhon. 
Massey notes that in the Book of the Dead the ‘Pool of Salt 
and of purification is described as the place of the beginning 
of years', i.e. the place of the beginning of time, or the source 
of kala typified by Kali or Babalon, the Scarlet Woman. 

There is here a confusion of types; the ass was originally a 
glyph of the female as the fount, foundation or seat, the ass 
as it is vulgarly called. The purging fluid was the kala of the 
lunar flow. The urine, although a purifyer, was but a second¬ 
ary source of purification, hence the association of the ass 
with the foundation (Yesod means ‘foundation’), and, later, 
with the lunar divisions: the bright and dark (fortnights) 
represented by the bright or golden water and the dark or 
menstrual flow. 

It is claimed by some authorities that the ass was the par¬ 
ticular object of adoration in the rites of the Templars, and 
that the sodomy connected with this symbolism — as with 
those rites — was itself symbolic of the backward, left, or 
under-hand way of the female. The Egyptian qabalah, with 
the ass standing for the number 30 connects it with ideas 
already mentioned in connection with this number and with 
the Tree of Life itself. 

Massey compares the ass with Noah, both being true time¬ 
keepers. This can be understood as meaning that both the ark 
of Noah, Nuit’s arch, the ass or fundament, are, like the 
moon and Sothis, regulators of periodic time. Furthermore, 

22 The Kaula Circle. See the Typhonian Trilogy; chapters on Left-handed 
Tantra. 

23 The Natural Genesis (Massey), vol. II, p. 346. 




114 Nigh tside of Eden 

the waters welling from the abyss and seething with the 
‘creatures of corruption’ (i.e. the qliphoth ) are purified by 
the magical regulation of time and period, and, when 
imbibed, confer the power of penetrating to the other side 
of the Tree. 

In order to grasp the full import of this Mystery it is here 
necessary to make an extended digression. There is a mystical 
connection, if not an actual identity, between the concepts 
Daath and Maat. In one of its spellings Maat is 51, the number 
of Edom (ADVM), the realm of the ‘demon kings’ or ‘un¬ 
balanced forces’. Spelt in another way it is 442, the number 
of APMI ARTz, ‘the end of the earth’. Maat means ‘rule’, 
‘measure’, ‘length’. 24 and it represents a termination or a 
boundary between one region and another, between the 
realm of Edom and the hither side of the Tree, or, conversely, 
between the end of the earth and the other side of the Tree. 
In a communication received by a contemporary Priestess 
of Maat, that goddess is described as the ‘Pause’. 25 Similarly, 
in Halevy’s book on the Qabalah, 26 Daath is described as the 
‘Interval’. Daath and Maat therefore symbolize the state of 
inbetweenness which Austin Spare associated with the 
infinitesimal break in the continuity of consciousness that 
permitted the influx of alien power. But it is in her avatar of 
Maut, the vulture goddess, that Maat becomes explicable as 
the solution de continuity in contradistinction to Nu or Nuit. 

Both Maut and Nu have the value of 56 (=11). Nuit, as 
the ‘continuous one of heaven’ 27 is dissolved into the dis¬ 
continuousness of hell 28 presided over by Maut who is 
identical with Maat as the atomic truth-particle, Atma. 29 The 
two concepts, Maut and Nu, together total 112 (twice 56) 
which is one more than 111, the number of Smai, a title of 

24 Cf. our word maths. s* 

2S See Liber Pennae Praenumbra. Cincinnati Journal of Ceremonial Magick, 
vol. L No I (1976).' 

26 Adam and the Kabbalistic Tree, p. 23. 

i ' , AL. L 27. 

28 The abyss. 

2 9 Also glossed by ‘Atum’ and ‘Edom’. 


Adumbrations of Maat 115 

Set and of the Greek word HNNHA, meaning ‘nine’. Nine is 
the number of Yesod, the power-zone that reflects Daath 
into the astral world. 5 + 6 + 5 + 6 yields 22, the number of 
rays connecting the 32 kalas of the Tree of Life. The ‘one’ 
that is more than 111 is also the ‘one in eight' explained 
earlier in connection with the symbolism of the eight-headed 
serpent: the ‘one in eight’ that is ‘ nine ’ by the fools 30 who 
are 111. 31 

As Crowley observes: 32 

If one assumes that the Tarot is of Egyptian origin, one may suppose 
that Mat (this card being the key card of the whole pack) really 
stands for Maut, the vulture goddess, who is an earlier and more 
sublime modification of the idea of Nuith than Isis. 

It is here maintained, however, that Maut is not only ‘an 
earlier .. . modification of the idea of Nuith’ etc., but the 
Primal Negative that assumes apparent continuity or duration 
in the phenomenal universe; that it is indeed the noumenal 
void that is the substratum of Reality. In other words, it is 
the emptiness that characterises the fool, or ‘silly one’, the 
mat or mad one, the ‘holy’ one that is ‘one in eight’, as pre¬ 
viously explained. And this one in eight is Daath or Maath — 
the Mouth of the Abyss, the hole in space that opens on to 
the other side of the Tree. 33 Thus, ideas such as The Fool, 
the vacuous, the mouth, the holy, are all embodied in the 
image of Maut. 

Crowley also draws attention to the fact that the vulture 
was anciently considered to have reproduced its kind by the 
intervention of the wind. The word ‘fool’, derives from 
‘follis’, a ‘wind-bag’, so that ‘even etymology gives the 
attribution to air’. 34 

When Crowley and Neuburg evoked Choronzon in the 
3< Ul. H.15. 

31 The letter Alcph, attributed to the Fool of the Tarot, when spelt in full 
yields the number 111. 

33 The Book of Thoth, p. 53. 

3 3 The reader is referred to The Book of Thoth, p. 55, where Crowley further 
observes that the word ‘silly’, meaning ‘empty’, derives from the German selig, 
meaning ‘holy’. 

3 *Ibid, p. 53. 


116 Nightside of Eden 

desert 35 they employed the dagger. This is the magical 
weapon attributed to air which, as a metaphycisal concept, 
symbolizes space and emptiness, the complement of time 
and continuity represented by Nuit. Maut and Nu-Isis 
therefore achieve equipoise in the eleventh power-zone 
and on the eleventh path ( aleph ), the Way of the Fool. 

Air is symbolic of the ghost or geist, the gust of wind or 
breath of spirit which — in biblical lore — impregnates the 
Virgin Mary and is thereafter known as the ‘holy’ ghost. 
Maut also reproduces after this fashion, for Matter (Maat) 
is the manifestation of the unmanifest, typified by space (the 
void). The extra-terrestrials fecundate humanity via space, 
and the transmitter of their subtle vibrations is the aethyr, 
symbolized by the dove, the beast of air. 

In the Comment to Liber Pennae Praenumbra it is noted 
that ‘Anything weighing more than Maat, Truth itself, cannot 
progress or cross the Abyss’. The feather that typifies Maat is 
a symbol of air and of flight; not the flight of the eagle, but 
of the vulture whose wings remain motionless in space, since 
there can be no movement in the void. The gods are the 
‘goers’ and ‘balance is maintained by onward motion’. 36 A 
total rupture of progression leads ‘immediately to the Abyss 
. . .’ because ‘when motion is transcended, the magician no 
longer exists, is no-thing’. 3 7 

The Word of the Aeon of Maat is IPSOS (IPSE + OS). It is 
translated by its Adepts as ‘the same mouth’. The mouth is 
Maut. Ipsos is further stated to be the word of the 23rd Path 
or Kala, the number of which is 56 (5 + 6 = 11). This is the 
number of both Nu and Maut, and eleven is the number of 
the qliphoth as well a?of magick. The 23rd kala is attributed 
to water, the element most opposed to air, for breath is 
abolished by water, which is attributed to the Hanged Man of 
the Tarot. 


3 s See Liber 418, 10th Aethyr. 

38 From the Comment to Liber Pennae Praenumbra. 
3 ’’Ibid. 


Adumbrations of Maat 117 

This Atu has an occult significance explicable in its deepest 
import only with reference to the Vama Marg. The Hanged 
Man is depicted upside down, a posture typical of the reversal 
associated with viparita karani . 38 The ‘water’peculiar to this 
path is the blood that flows from the mouth of that goddess 
whose symbol is the vulture, a bird that was reputed to feed 
upon this formative fluid. The vampire bat is another 
zootype of the blood-sucker who was ‘hanged’. It hangs upside 
down in its ‘yogic’ sleep of satiation, gorged upon the vital 
fluid of its victims. 

The Hebrew word for water is MIM = 90, the number of 
Tzaddi, the letter of which it is written: 39 ‘Tzaddi is not the 
Star’. 40 The meaning of Tzaddi is a ‘fish hook’, and the fish 
is the secret sperm that swims in the blood of the priestess 
whose symbol is the Silver Star. The number of the Priestess 
is 3, which, together with Tzaddi yields 93, or 3 x 31. The 
Path of the Priestess is ascribed to the number 13, the reversal 
of 31, the Key of AL, which, in the hands of the Priestess, 
3, becomes 93. 41 Thirteen denotes the magical current cog¬ 
nate with menstrual blood, the blood 42 that both emanes 
from, and is imbibed by, the Hanged Man. 

This symbolism equates with that of the black pearl in the 
crystal lotus described in Liber Pennae Praenumbra. The 
pearl is the special stone of the Priestess; it is black because 
she is the priestess of Kali, of Time, or ‘at her time, or 
period’. The crystal is attributed to the 13th path; the lotus 
to the 23rd path 43 

There is, however, a profoundly mystical manner in which 
this blood is not; that is to say, in which it is the antithesis 
of time and, therefore, of manifestation. MIM, spelt with 

3 8 Reversion of the senses. See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 4. 

39 AL. I. 57. 

40 Frater Achad’s interpretation of this phrase as meaning ‘Tzaddi is Nuit 
(Not), the Star’ may more nearly approach the heart of the mystery, as distinct 
from Crowley’s which maintains that Tzaddi is not the Star because some other 
letter is. 

41 The number of Thelema, Agape, Aiwass, Nahaka etc. 

4 2 Glyphed as MIM, water. 

4 3 According to Liber 777 ‘all water plants’ are ascribed to the 23rd path. 



118 Nightside of Eden 

the final ‘m’ counted as 600, becomes 650, 44 which is the 
number of the Chaldean word LShOIRM, meaning daemont- 
bus hirsute (to the hairy deities). 45 These were types of 
Set 46 as gods of generation. Nuit says: ‘My incense is of 
resinous wood & gums; and there is no blood therein: 
because of my hair the trees of Eternity’. 47 She then goes on 
to declare: ‘My number is 11, as all their numbers who are of 
u f’• Here Nuit gives the recipe of her incense in contra¬ 
distinction to her perfumes, fragrances, or flowers (i.e. the 
lotus). Incense is ascribed to air, space, the void; and flowers 
(particularly the lotus) to water, blood. Thus, Maat (air), 
and Maut (blood) are formulated in Nuit as NOT, ‘the Star’! 

Maat is the feminine counterpart of Thoth, who is identical 
with Daath. Maat and Daath have therefore an esoteric 
equip ollence which is nowhere made so plain as in the 
ascription to Thoth — as his consort — of the cynocephalus 
or dog-headed ape. Maat is therefore the True Word which, 
when reflected or ‘aped’ by the cynocephalus, becomes 
falsehood. It is this dual aspect of Nuit, as the non-manifest 
(noumenon) and the manifest (phenomena), that is combined 
in the eleventh power-zone, Daath. Daath is therefore the 
crux of the Tree, the true place of crossing over to the ‘other 
side’, and its significance in relation to Maat as the window 
opening upon the Nu Aeon, the Aeon of Nu-Isis or Maat, will 
now be explained. 


44 Note the 6 + 5-11 symbolism recurring. 

4 5 Worshipped in Egypt. 

4 6 Of the LShOIRM or Serau, Massey notes ‘There is a particular kind of hairy 
goat known on the monuments as the Serau. . . In the language of Egypt, says 
Herodotus (u. 46), both a goat and the god Pan are called Mendes.’ I.e. the serau 
were sacred to Set, the Egytpian form of Pan. 

4 1 AL. I. 59. Italics by present author. 




( 


11 

The Vulture’s Mouth 


THE WORD of the Aeon of Maat which initiates have 
claimed to have received while in communication with extra¬ 
terrestrial intelligences, 1 is IPSOS, meaning ‘the same mouth’. 
In the second chapter of AL (verse 76) occurs a cryptic 
cypher which contains a group of letters having the value of 
IPSOS. In fact, two different spellings of Ipsos produce 
numbers equivalent to a group of letters in AL. The crypto¬ 
gram in AL is RPSTOVAL, which has the qabalistic value 
of 696 or 456 according as to whether the letter ‘S’ is read as 
a shin or as a samekh. Similarly, IPSOS = 696 or 456 accord¬ 
ing as to whether the first ‘s’ is taken as a shin or a samekh. 
IPSOS is therefore the qabalistic equivalent of RPSTOVAL. 
The meaning of this group of letters is not known, but Ipsos 
the mouth, the organ of the Word of Utterance (outrance), 
of Feeding, Sucking, Drinking etc., is the organ not only of 
uttering but also of receiving the Word. 

The RPSTOVAL formula partakes of IPSOS, for the for¬ 
mula of the Tower 2 is that of the Phallus in eruption, and the 
ejaculation 3 of the Word of the Aeon of Maat, the Word that 
extends to ‘the end of the earth’. 4 The earth is under the 
dominion of the Prince of the Air (i.e. Shaitan), but the 

‘See page 116, note 36. 

2 Associated with the formula of IPSOS; see Plate 8. 

3 Via the meatus, a lower mouth. 

4 Maat = 442 = APMI ARTz = ‘the end of the earth’. 



120 Nightside of Eden 

spaces beyond are under the dominion of the Lord of the 
Aethyr, whose symbol is the vulture. 

No formula can be cosmic that is not essentially micro- 
cosmic, for the one contains the other. It is therefore sug¬ 
gested that the formula of RPSTOVAL is that of a specifically 
physiological process which involves the mouth (uterus) in 
its most recondite phase. 

The mouth as Maat, the Truth, the Word; Mat, the Mother; 
Maut, the Vulture; and Mort, the Dead 5 is implicit in the 
symbolism of the Tower. The eruption or utterance of the 
Tower (phallus) is the outrance of the Word into the spaces 
beyond the earth that are one with the aethyrs 6 represented 
by el Mato, the Fool, the Mat or Mad One, and Le Mort, the 
Dead. 

The Path of the Fool (eleventh path) is the secret extension 
of the Path of the Tower (Atu XVI) and an initiated com¬ 
prehension of this symbolism yields a key to the formula of 
the Aeon of Maat which is resumed by the number 27 
(11 + 16), the number of the Path of the Dead and of Atu 
XVI, The Tower. 1 It is significant that the Path of the Tower 
is in fact the 27th Path. This number is attributed to Liber 
Trigrammaton, an as yet unfathomed Holy Book received by 
Crowley from Aiwass. Crowley suspected that it contained 
the secret of the ‘English’ qabalah, and in his Commentaries 
on AL he attempted to equate the trigrams with the letters of 
the English alphabet in order to discover the English qabalah 
as he was bidden to do in AL} But the equations were far 
from convincing, even to himself. What he seemed not to 
understand was that the qabalah he sought pertained to a 
different dimension altogether, and that the mouth that was 
to communicate this qabalah was the mouth whose emana¬ 
tions are the kalas themselves. Hence, as I have suggested in 
Cults of the Shadow (chapter 7) concerning the word 

s Le. the subconsciousness (Amenta). 

6 IPSOS spelt as 760 is equivalent to ‘Empyreum’, the empyrean. 

# 7 In some Tarot packs this atu is known as The Blasted Tower. 

8 Thou shalt obtain the order & value of the English alphabet; thou shalt find 
new symbols to attribute them unto’. (AL. n. 55 ). 


The Vulture’s Mouth 121 

RPSTOVAL, with equal probability may the word IPSOS 
conceal a formula of psychosexual kalas that may be 
fathomed in relation to a tantric interpretation of sexual 
polarity. 

The interplay of the vagina and the phallus (i.e. the mouth 
and the tower) is resumed under the eroto-oral formula 
known in popular parlance as the soixante-neuf (69). But the 
matter is a little more recondite than that usually implied by 
this practice. The numbers 6 and 9 denote the sun and the 
moon, Tiphereth and Yesod, and, in terms of the 32 kalas 
the 6 and the 9 refer to those of Leo 9 and Pisces. 10 The total 
enumeration yields 109, the number of NDNH, a Hebrew 
word meaning ‘vagina’. 11 Deducting the cypher, 109 
becomes 19, which is the ‘feminine glyph’. 12 109 therefore 
shows the egg or sphere — 0 — of the Void, the ain of the 
infinite in its feminine form. The magical significance of this 
symbolism is subsumed under the number 69: the radiant 
solar-phallic energy (lightning) of the Angel 13 streaking into 
the mouth, chalice or womb of the Moon to mingle with the 
qoph kala. 14 The resultant brew is the vinum sabbati, the 
Wine of the Sabbath of the Witches which can be distilled, 
according to the ancient grimoires, ‘when the finial of the 
Tower is obscured (or veiled) by the wing of the vulture’. 

A peculiar cry is said to issue from the mouth of the 
vulture. In The Heart of the Master, 15 Crowley notes that 
this cry or word is Mu. Its number, 46, is the ‘key of the 
mysteries’, for it is the number of Adam (Man). Mu is the 
male seed, 16 but it is also the water (i.e. blood) from which 
man was fashioned. 17 The vulture is a bird of blood and its 

9 The kala of the Sun, ascribed to the letter Teth, meaning a ‘lion-serpent’. 

10 The kala of the Moon, ascribed to the letter Qoph, meaning ‘the back of 
the head’. 

11 The number 109 is also that of OGVL, ‘circle’, ‘sphere’; BQZ, ‘lightning’; 
and AHP, ‘Air’. 

12 See 777 Revised: Meaning of the Primes from 11-97. 

13 Tiphareth; the Sphere of the Holy Guardian Angel. 

14 See Diagram 1, Cults of the Shadow. 

15 Re-published in 1974 by 93 Publishing, Montreal. 

16 Cf. the Egyptian word mat 

17 A-DM or Adam was made from the ‘red earth’ (i.e. DM, blood). 







122 Nightside of Eden 

piercing cry is uttered at the time of sundering 18 which 
accompanies the act of manifestation: ‘For I am divided for 
love’s sake, for the chance of union’. ( AL. I. 29). 

The number 46 also connotes the dividing veil (Paroketh), 
previously explained. MAH, 46, is the Hebrew for 100, the 
number of qoph and therefore of the ‘back of the head’, the 
seat of the sexual energies in man. One hundred denotes 
completion or fulfilment of a cycle of time. 19 The full 
meaning of the symbolism is therefore that when the vulture 
opens her wings to receive the phallic stroke in the silence 
and secrecy of the cloud, 20 her shrill scream of rapture, 
hriliu, 21 is MU (46). 22 

It is at this stage necessary to make an apparently irrele¬ 
vant digression if the full import of the Tower symbolism is 
to be understood. 

In a dilapidated building formerly situated on the site now 
occupied by Centre Point 23 there occurred, in 1949, a 
curious magical rite. It happened at the instigation of Gerald 
Gardner. 24 The room in which the rite occurred was tenanted 
at that time by a ‘witch’ whom I shall call Mrs. South. She 
was actually a procuress and whore who spiced her activities 
with an ‘occult’ flavour calculated to appeal to a certain type 
of clientele. Accompanied by my wife and Gerald Gardner, 
the three of us made our way to Mrs. South’s apartment after 
an afternoon spent with Gardner in his flat in Ridgemount 
Terrace off the Tottenham Court Road. The rite required 
five people and could commence only upon the arrival of a 

18 HBDLH (sundering) = 46. 

19 Cf. the Egyptian word meh, ‘fill’, ‘full’, ‘complete’. 

20 Paroketh also means ‘a cloud’; a reference to the invisibility traditionally 
assumed by the male god when impregnating the virgin. 

21 In his personal copy of Liber XV (The Gnostic Mass), Crowley explains 
hriliu as the ‘metaphysical ecstasy’ that accompanies sexual orgasm. 

2 2 It is of interest to note in connection with the meaning of the word IPSOS, 
that Frater Achad came very close to a similar interpretation of his own formula 
of the Aeon of Maat, viz. Ma-Ion. In a letter dated June 7, 1948, he writes: ‘Please 
note that in Sanskrit Ma = Not. In the same language it also means: ‘Mouth’. 

2 3 London WC1. 

24 The author of two books on Witchcraft that attracted some attention at 
the time of their publication in the 1950s. 


The Vulture’s Mouth 123 

young lady whom Mrs. South was expecting for that purpose. 
The young lady was supposed to be — like Mrs. South herself 
— well versed in the deeper aspects of witchcraft. I will not 
deny the fact that her witchery proved genuine, but that she 
knew even less about the craft than Mrs. South I also will 
not deny. 

Gardner explained that the purpose of the rite was to 
demonstrate his ability to ‘bring down the power’. He 
intended raising a current of magical energy with the purpose 
of contacting certain extra-terrestrial intelligences with which 
I was, at that time, 2S in almost constant rapport. The rite 
was to consist of the circumambulation of the five of us 
round a large sigil inscribed on parchment which had been 
specially consecrated. The sigil had been designed for my use 
by Austin Osman Spare who was, at the time, also engaged 
in contacting extra-terrestrials. The sigil would later be con¬ 
sumed in the flame of a candle set on an altar in the north 
quarter of the apartment. Apart from this magical equipment, 
Mrs. South’s room contained only two or three shelves of 
books on witchcraft and the ‘occult’ generally; they had no 
doubt been imported by her to lend an air of authenticity to 
her more usual pursuits. 

Whether or not the rite would have been effective is open 
to question. It was interrupted before the initial invocation 
had been concluded. This consisted of a deosil circumam¬ 
bulation of the altar with ever increasing rapidity in ever 
diminishing circles. The front door-bell rang suddenly in the 
depths of the otherwise deserted building, at first feebly, 
then piercingly and persistently. The determined caller 
proved to be the proprietor of an ‘occult’ bookshop situated 
at no great distance from Mrs. South’s apartment. On learning 
that I was upstairs however the visitor decided not to come 
up. 26 He drifted off into the vague November mist that later 

25 The incident occurred during the formative stage of a lodge of the O.T.O. 
which I had founded for the purpose of channelling specific magical influences 
from a transplutonic source symbolized by Nu-Isis. 

26 My association with Alcister Crowley was not unknown to him. 



124 Nigh tside of Eden 

that evening developed into a good old-fashioned London fog. 

The point of this account is to illustrate a curious fact 
characteristic of the odd manner in which magick frequently 
works. The sigil that was to have formed the focus of the 
Operation that night was that of a particularly potent spirit, 
which would undoubtedly have been described by Gardner 
and Mrs. South as essentially ‘phallic’. This fact is important, 
for soon after the abortive ceremony Mrs. South died under 
mysterious circumstances; the bookshop owner’s marriage 
disintegrated violently and he too died shortly afterwards. 
Gerald Gardner was himself not long in following suit. But 
the towering edifice later reared upon the site that these 
magicians frequented is to my mind a fitting monument to 
the futility of that evening’s Working. 

1 have been prompted to give this account of a magical rite 
that misfired by a statement made by Ithell Colquhoun who 
recognizes in the Post Office Tower a monument to the 
magic of MacGregor Mathers, some of whose activities were 
concentrated in that region of London. 27 The premise may 
be absurd, but it should be remembered that the surrealists, 
of which Ithell Colquhoun is one, fathomed many magical 
mysteries that have escaped more prosaic practitioners and 
investigators. The cases of Centre Point and the Post Office 
Tower (both forms of the Magical Tower discussed in the 
present chapter) lead on logically to the Tower symbolism 
that pervades the Workings of various contemporary occultists 
operating independently of each other. 

During the past few years the present writer has received 
letters from individuals and magical groups the world over, 
and it is perhaps not surprising — in view of the common 
nature of our researches — that certain dominant symbols 
should recur. For example, Liber Pennae Praenumbra which 
was recently recieved by Adepts in Ohio, U.S.A., is permeated 

2 7 See Sword of Wisdom: MacGregor Mathers and the Golden Dawn, by Ithell 
Colquhoun, Nevile Spearman, 1975. Miss Colquhoun observes that W. B. Yeats 
and others were initiated in Fitzroy Street, and comments: Today the Post 
Office Tower overshadowing the street could, I suppose, be seen as a projection of 
the power of Hermes, here superseding that of Isis-Urania’. (p. 50). 


The Vulture’s Mouth 125 

with the symbols depicted in Allen Holub’s vivid delineation 
of The Vulture on the Tower of Silence (see plate 8): The 
Vulture of Maat, the Bee of Sekhet, the Tower of Silence, 
and the Serpent whose codings form the word IPSOS. 

Another independent group of Adepts in New York, led 
by Soror Tanith of the O.T.O., has also received identical 
symbols, of which the Tower of Silence and the Bee of 
Sekhet are paramount. The transmission to Soror Tanith 
issued from an extra-terrestrial entity known as LAM which 
was previously contacted by Crowley in 1919. 28 

The leader of the Cult of the Black Snake, Michael Bertiaux, 
also contacted LAM while working with the Tibetan Bon-Pa 
Current in the nineteen-sixties. 29 In all these invocations 
and magical workings, the symbolism described above has 
been dominant, which suggests that at all three places (i.e. 
Ohio, New York, and Chicago) an identical occult energy, 
entity, or ray, is beaming vibrations consonant with the 
symbols of Mu or Maat and may therefore proceed from that 
future aeon. This tends to confirm Frater Achad’s theory 
that there is an overlap caused by a ‘kink in time’ which is 
manifesting its spiral coil according to ancient lore, 30 where 
it was symbolized by the vulture with the spiral neck and by 
the wryneck whose physical peculiarities made of it a 
similarly apt totem or sentient symbol. 

Another totem, less easily explicable, is the hyena. Like 
the vulture, the hyena is a ‘beast of blood’, but this alone 
does not account for its use as a zoomorphic glyph in the 
Draconian Tradition. According to ancient lore the hyena can 
see right or left only by slewing round its entire body; i.e. 

28 Crowley also was in New York at the time he established contact with this 
entity. An impression of LAM drawn by Crowley appears in The Magical Revival, 
plate 5. The drawing was originally exhibited in Greenwich Village in 1919 and 
published in The Blue Equinox. 

29 See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 10. 

30 Zoroaster (c.l 100 B.C.) was well aware of the mysterious bend in time that 
has exercised the ingenuity of some of the acutest modem thinkers. He described 
God as having ‘a spiral force' and associated the time-lag with the progression of 
aeons that returned again to its source of origin, thus reactivating the primal 
atavisms of pre-eval consciousness. 




126 Nightside of Eden 

it cannot turn its head. It is therefore of equal valency, sym¬ 
bolically, as the wryneck. As a totem of the abyss, the 
attribution to the hyena is self evident in respect of its haunt¬ 
ing the crypts and tombs of old Egypt and of feeding upon 
the dead. The desert symbolism also applies. In India the 
vulture and the hyena are among the beasts associated with 
the rites of Kali. The tantric element of the rite is thus 
implicit. 

There are close similarities between the Afro-Egyptian 
rites of Shaitan celebrated in Sumer and Akkad, and the later 
Indian tantric rites of Kali. The distinctly Mongolian flavour 
of these rites noted by scholars 31 is evident in the peculiar 
ethos that pervades much of the literature connecfed with 
the Kaulas, who use the goat, the pig, the vulture, snake, 
spider, bat, and other typically Typhonian beasts in their 
sacrificial ceremonies. There is also a secret confraternity in 
South America at the present time that numbers amongst the 
votaries of its inner circle those who have passed the Portals 
of Inbetweeness in the god-form of the bat. This is the 
zootype of the vampire beast of blood which is linked to the 
symbolism of the vulture and the hyena. The bat hangs 
upside down in sleep after feeding; the hyena is retromingent; 
and the vulture, whose wry neck suggests a form of backward 
‘seeing’, are occult determinatives of that retroversion of the 
senses that makes possible the leap over the abyss. This jump 
is a plummeting backwards through the time-space void of 
Daath with the result that the bottom falls out of the world 
of the Adept who essays it. Sax Rohmer, who was once a 
member of the Golden Dawn, 32 makes a passing allusion to 
this cult in his novel Baturing, and although he impairs the 
effect of his story by resorting to the hackneyed literary 
device of a mechanistic solution, he nonetheless refers to an 
actual cult when he says: 

Whereas snakes and scorpions have always been recognized as 

31 See Studies in the Tantras, by Prabodh Chandra Bagchi. 

3i According to Cay Van Ash & Elizabeth Sax Rohmer. See Master of Villainy, 
chapter 4. Ohio Popular Press, 1972. 


The Vulture’s Mouth 127 

sacred by Voodoo worshippers, the real emblem of their unclean 

religion is the bat, especially the vampire bat of South America. 33 

Rohmer, like H. P. Lovecraft, had direct and conscious 
experience of the inner planes, and both established contact 
with non-spatial entities. Furthermore, both these writers 
recoiled — in their novels and in their private correspondence 
respectively — from actual confrontation with entities that 
are easily recognizable as the envoys of Choronzon-Shugal. 
The masks of these entities achieved a quality of such com¬ 
pelling clarity that neither Rohmer nor Lovecraft were able 
to face what lay beneath. Yet the insurmountable abhorrence 
inspired by such contacts hid magical potential, compressed 
and explosive, that made both these writers masters in their 
respective branches of creative occultism. 

There is no doubt that writers such as Sax Rohmer, H. P. 
Lovecraft, Arthur Machen, Algernon Blackwood, Charles 
Williams, Dion Fortune, etc., brought powerful influences 
to bear upon the occult scene through their various 
delineations of the Qliphoth. The formula of the abyss, for 
instance, has been incomparably allegorized by the symbolism 
of the psychological somersault described by Charles Williams 
(in Descent into Hell) who uses the haunting lines: 

The Magus Zoroaster, my dead child, 

Met his own image walking in the garden, 
as a theme for his story. 

The turning over or turning backwards is the formula 
implicit in the ancient symbology of witchcraft. 34 

The familiars of the witches, no less than the god-forms 
assumed by the Egyptian priests were adopted in order to 
transform the practitioners, not into the animals in question, 
but into the state of consciousness which they represented 
in the psychological bestiary of atavistic powers latent in the 
subconsciousness. The formula is summed up by Austin Spare 

33 Batwing, p. 92. 

34 This formula is equivalent to the Hindu nivritti marga or ‘path of return’, 
or reversion of the senses to their source in pure consciousness. It is typified in 
the tantras as viparita maithuna, symbolized by upside-down sexual congress. 



128 Nightside of Eden 

in his system of sexual sorcery and atavistic resurgence which 
are the themes of Zos Kia Cultus. 35 Ithell Colquhoun correctly 
places this cult in its contemporary setting as an offshoot of 
the O.T.O. and ‘Traditional Witchcraft’, 36 but Zos Kia Cultus 
comports another strand which stems from influences older 
than any that can be attributed to merely ‘traditional witch¬ 
craft’, whatever that term may signify. These influences 
emanate from cults such as those that Lovecraft contacted 
in New England via Salem Witchcraft which — in turn — had 
contacts with vastly ancient currents which manifested in the 
Amerindian astral complex as the ‘eldritch’ entities described 
by Lovecraft in his tales of horror. 

Such also were the entities which Spare contacted through 
‘Black Eagle’. 37 Black Eagle induced in Spare the extreme 
vertigo that initiated some of his finest work. Spare 
‘visualized’ this sensation of creative vertigo in a picture 
entitled Trapeze Tragedy (plate 15) the theme of which he 
repeated in several paintings. The formula is essential to 
his sorcery. 

The trapeze or swing was the vahana 38 of Radha and 
Krishna, whose love-play is associated with the vertigo 
induced by the swaying of the emotions and of falling 
(madly) in love. With Spare, however, the ecstasy achieves 
its apotheosis through a catastrophic sensation of crushing 
oppression, of being pushed down and plummeting into 
the abyss. 

The swing is identical with the cradle which plays so pro¬ 
minent a part in the mysteries of the Krishna Gopal Cult. 39 
But long ante-dating the rites of the black child, Krishna, 
were the rites of the black child Set, or Harpocrates, the babe 
in the black egg of Akashaf 0 The Aeon of the Child 41 is the 

3 s See Images & Oracles of Austin Osman Spare, Part II. 

36 Sword of Wisdom (Colquhoun), chapter 16. 

3 7 For a portrait of this entity, see The Magical Revival, plate 12. 

38 This term in Sanskrit denotes a ‘vehicle’ or focus of force. 

39 Cult of the Child Krishna. 

40 Akasha : meaning ‘Spirit’ or ‘Aethyr’, is the fifth element. 

41 i.e. the Aeon of Horns. Horus or Har means the ‘child’. 


The Vulture’s Mouth 129 

Aeon of the Babe of the Abyss, one of whose symbols is 
the cradle which symbolizes the swinging or crossing over to 
the Aeon of Maat (Mu). Mu, 46, the Key of the Mysteries, 
is also the number of MV (water, i.e. blood) which is typified 
by the vulture, the hyena, and other ‘beasts of blood’. In 
magical terms, the sensation induced in the plummeting 
trapezist is summarized by Spare in a pictorial formula to 
which he gave no particular name, but which may be des¬ 
cribed as the Formula of Creative Vertigo. In his picture of 
the trapezist the performer is feminine for she represents the 
human embodiment of the awakened Fire Snake. It is the 
foot , 4 2 not the hand that is chosen to instigate the means 
of falling. 

In Zos Kia Cultus Spare exalted the Hand and the Eye as 
the major instruments of reification. That is to say he exalted 
a magical formula similar to that which characterizes the 
eighth degree of the O.T.O. 43 Yet he realized that the sup¬ 
reme formula efficacious in surpassing the abyss is that which 
involves not the hand, but the ‘foot’. The foot is under or 
beneath the hand and so, symbolically, the ‘left’ hand 
typified by the Scarlet Woman, the dust of whose feet is the 
red powder celebrated by the Tamil Siddhas. 44 The scarlet 
dust, or fire-dust, is the nuclear emanation of the Fire-Snake 
in its upward streaking, and it leads to enlightenment in a 
cosmic sense. But a further process is necessary to admit the 
Adept to the zones of Non-Being represented by the other 
side of the Tree of Life which is dreaded by the non-initiate 
as the Tree of Death. 

Beyond the Abyss, sexuality or polarity loses all meaning. 
This explains why, according to Golden Dawn doctrine, 
Adepts beyond the Grade of 7° = 4 D 4 5 were no longer incar¬ 
nate. As there exists no adequate terminology (in the Western 
Tradition) for this state of affairs we can but refer, by way of 

4 2 The symbolism of the feet of the goddess is explained in Aleister Crowley & 
the Hidden God, chapter 10. 

4 3 The formula is applied by means of manual auto-erotism. 

44 See The Religion and Philosophy of Tevaram, by D. Rangaswamy. 

4s The Grade immediately preceding the Abyss. 




130 Nightside of Eden 

analogy, to the Mahapurusas of the Hindu Tradition. Maha- 
purusas are non-human beings that appear to Adepts on the 
spiritual path. A recent well documented example of such a 
manifestation occurred in the life of Pagal Haranath. 46 He 
was considered to be an incarnation of Krishna and a reincar¬ 
nation of Sri Caitanya, the 15th century bhakta 4 ’’ who 
inspired the inhabitants of Bengal by the intensity and 
fervour of his devotion to Krishna (God). To Pagal Haranath 
a Mahapurusa appeared as a gigantic form radiant with light. 
The only Western parallel (of recent years) that comes to mind is 
the oft quoted account of MacGregor Mathers’encounter with 
the ‘Secret Chiefs’ which occurred in the Bois de Boulogne. 48 

Aleister Crowley in contradistinction to MacGregor 
Mathers, maintained that Adepts of supreme attainment do 
sometimes remain in the flesh; that is to say, the experience 
known as ‘crossing the abyss’ does not necessarily comport 
physical death. This is, of course, well known in the East, 
where, in our own time, there have been outstanding 
examples such as Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, Sri Ramana 
Maharshi, Sri Sai Baba (of Shirdi), Sri Anandamayi Ma and 
Sri Anusaya Devi 49 to mention but a few. 

It has been objected that Crowley did not successfully 
cross the Abyss. 50 Be that as it may, certain Western initiates 
undoubtedly have achieved this crossing and it is evident in 
their writings. Although a matter of opinion — and it is here 
stated as such, and no more - the foremost of Western 
Adepts in this category is he who writes under the pseudonym 
Wei Wu Wet. His books are to be commended as the richest, 
the subdest, and most vividly potent excursions into the Void 
of Formless Consciousness yet reduced to words. 

l<J97 6S An Pagal the .‘ Mad ’ or 'Crazy', lived in West Bengal from 1865- 

k Vlsltatl0n 1S contained in Shri Haranath: His Play & 

e Nathabl ^. Mehta - Bombay, 1954. Such manifestations 
occurring in primitive times could have given rise to the concept of the NPhLIM 
or Giants. See chapter 9, supra. 

4 ’Devotee of God. 

4 q Quoted in Aleister Crowley & the Hidden God, chapter 1. 
available for ^darshan. *** fortUnately ’ stfll incarnate sofsiras I am aware, 

50 Fra ter Achad. See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 8. 


12 


7 yphonian Totems of the Tantras 


THE FORMULA of Creative Vertigo as a method of dream 
control 1 will not be immediately apparent unless it is under¬ 
stood that Spare used the formula imaginatively — i.e. at the 
level of dream - in order to effect transformations of 
consciousness in the wakeful state. The sense of oppression 
generated by the abrupt reversal of the Fire Snake as it 
attains the crown of the head and sheers over in a shower of 
fire, is induced by the formula of creative vertigo no less than 
by traditional yogic techniques. The physiological parallel of 
the formula as a purely symbolic process is used in an 
alchemical sense by tantrics of the Varna Marg, and it involves 
the imbibition of the rain of Fire proceeding from the feet 
of the Goddess. The effect of such potation on the astral 
anatomy is visualized by Spare as the foot crushing the 
woman s head. Why this should be so is not clear, but it is 
undoubtedly bound up with Spare’s personal aesthetic ethos. 
Its success as a formula, however, seems to prove the validity 
of traditional systems of correspondence such as those pre¬ 
sented in Liber 777. Similar considerations apply to subjective 
and personal systems (provided they are consistent and 
internally coherent) such as those intuited by Baudelaire and 

JThe technique of dream control is explained in the Typhonian Trilogy 
particularly in Cults of the Shadow, chapter 11, where the full formula is given! 





132 Nightside of Eden 

Rimbaud and those later exponents of dream control, the 
surrealists. 2 

Working within the limits of a rigorously disciplined art 
as a means of visualizing sensation, Spare was probably the 
first to explain a magical method of affecting reality (the 
wakeful state) from the level of pure fantasy (dream state), 
fantasy that projects through the prism of the dream state a 
precise adjustment or modification of seemingly disconnected 
and arbitrary objects, which, in the wakeful state appear dis¬ 
parate and irreconcilable. On the basis of this method Spare 
claimed that he was the first surrealist. Curiously enough, the 
proof of this is not so apparent in his graphic work as in his 
books, where he traces the vital function of the fetish (or 
obsession) in relation to dream control. His use of the terms 
‘intrusive familiar’, ‘elemental automata’, ‘sentient symbols’, 
‘resurgent atavisms’, the total concept, in fact, of his ‘alpha¬ 
bet of desire’ as a series of glyphs having a pre-eminently 
Sexual connotation, are evidence of his insight into the 
possibility of controlling the wakeful state via the world of 
dream or fantasy. In a word, through a direct control of the 
subconsciousness. 

This is of interest in view of traditional attitudes to these 
matters. The Hindus, for instance, seem to doubt the pos¬ 
sibility of affecting mundane phenomena through the dream 
state. They claim, therefore, that karma does not accrue as a 
result of dream activity. They argue that any action per¬ 
formed in the dream state is of an involuntary nature and 
therefore free of karmic consequences, for karma is generated 
by motive alone. But Spare has shown that dream actions are 
not necessarily involuntary and that from astral levels of 
consciousness an Adept may mould its substance into causes 
that appear as effects in the wakeful state (i.e. on the material 
plane of ‘objects’). 

2 Salvador Dali, particularly, has demonstrated the efficacy of the personal 
fetish as a key to magical and mystical attainment. (See The Unspeakable Con¬ 
fessions of Salvador Dali, W. H. Allen, 1975.) Compare his system of delirious 
paranoiac-critical activity with Spare’s system of magical obsession by sentient 
symbols and resurgent atavisms bom of the ecstasy of self-love. 


Typhonian Totems of the Tantras 133 

Dion Fortune also emphasized the possibility of ‘dreaming 
true’ in a magical or creative sense. 3 This Adept’s work has 
been frequendy misrepresented. It is not generally known, for 
example, that Fortune had a strong link with the Current 
with which Spare and Crowley worked. 4 This Current had 
received a dream-oriented impulse from Spare’s writings and 
art, both of which Crowley admired at the time 5 that he and 
Spare were in personal contact. This admiration continued up 
to the time of Crowley’s death, as I learned when I questioned 
him concerning his attitude to Spare and his work. Crowley 
regretted that Spare had become ‘a Black Brother’ by ‘shut¬ 
ting himself up in a tower and immersing himself in the Pool 
of Narcissus’, by which Crowley meant that Spare had 
resorted almost exclusively to the use of the magical formula 
known in the O.T.O. as the VIH 0 . 

Crowley’s speculations about Spare raise an interesting 
point; one that is of immediate relevance to our enquiry. In 
Magick Crowley alludes (a) to the possibility of a fall from 
the Tree of Life, and (b), to the dog Cerberus: 

It is even said that in certain circumstances it is possible to fall 

altogether from the Tree of Life and attain to the Towers of the 

Black Brothers . . . 6 

Nothing shall be said here of Cerberus, the great Beast of Hell ... 

for this matter is not of Tiphereth without, but Tiphereth within . 7 

According to Greek mythology Cerberus was the mon¬ 
strous watch-dog of Hades; the offspring of Typhon and 
Echidna. The latter was sometimes described as half woman, 
half serpent. Cerberus had three (or fifty) heads and hair 
composed of snakes; he is thus equivlant to the desert dog 
Shugal, or the fenekh fox of Ethiopia, the symbol of Set. His 

3 See The Magical Revival, chapter 10. 

4 Shortly after her death, Crowley wrote in a letter to Louis Wilkinson dated 
19.3.1946: ‘Dion Fortune is dead. There was a very secret understanding by 
which she acknowledged my authority'. 

5 Spare became a member of Crowley’s A.'.A.', at that time (i.e. 1910), taking 
the motto Yivohaum, a combination of IHVH (Jehovah) and AUM, the Hindu 
bija-mantra symbolising the primordial creative vibration. 

6 Mdgick, p. 480. The quotation is from Liber Thisharb. 

^Magick, p. 491. The quotation is from Liber Jugorum. 




134 Nightside of Eden 

connection is with the nightside of the Tree, as evidenced by 
the expression of ‘Tiphereth within’. This is the sun of the 
dark, the setting sun or sun of Set which, completing its 
cycle, dips into the Abyss and illumines the ‘Towers of the 
Black Brothers’ that are the shadows of the City of the 
Pyramids 8 cast from Binah into the Sphere of the Black Sun 
(Tiphereth within). 

The phallic spire or Tower of the black brothers is the 
‘abomination of desolation’ in the desert of the Night of 
Time. It was the silent witness of the deluge in the abyss, 
typified in the Draconian Cult by the overflowing of the Nile. 
The mystery of the Nile’s cyclic overflow and its relation to 
the solar-phallic energy of Tiphereth was represented by the 
lioness Sekhet, one of whose symbols was the bee. This 
mystery was expounded by the ancient Egyptians, but the 
secret keys concerning it were either lost or withdrawn by 
the Typhonian initiates ages before the commencement of 
the monumental period of Egyptain history. Certain Adepts 
down the centuries have attempted to restore them. One of 
these was Ankh-af-na-Khonsu; a high priest of Amen-Ra in 
the XXVIth dynasty. 9 Although he failed, these arcana 
persisted and, by devious routes, they manifest today in the 
yet vital tradition of Asiatic tantras that are believed to have 
derived from Mongol sources. 

In the West today, therefore, we are in the paradoxical 
position of finding the keys to the Draconian Mysteries, not 
in Africa but in Oriental traditions that carried on the 
Typhonian Cult in tantric schools of initiation. It is said that 
these are open to those who are able to gain access, astrally, to 
their temples and hidden retreats, not all of which are 
situated in Asia or its sidereal reflection. 

In 1946 a part of the tantric teachings concerning the 
Chandrakala 10 was transmitted to me by an initiate of the 

8 One of the designations of Binah, the cosmic power-zone associated with 
Saturn, the planetary representative of Set. 

9 Crowiey claimed to have been a re-embodiment of the magical current rep¬ 
resented by the priesthood to which Ankh-af-na-Khonsu belonged. 

10 Literally ‘moon’ juice’ or moon medicine; the sixteenth and supreme kala 
(mahakala) which it is the object of the lunar current to reify. 


Typhonian Totems of the Tantras 135 

Varna Marg. This Adept was also a member of the Ordo 
Templi Orientis, having been initiated into the Sovereign 
Sanctuary of that Order by Crowley in 1945. My Typhonian 
Trilogy is an attempt to present the arcane science of the 
kalas 11 in terms of the Western Mystery Tradition. 

This science was once known to the Western Tradition 
into which it seeped from Egypt and Sumer, but the keys 
were lost and the result may be seen in the grotesque and 
indecipherable manuals of alchemy which, to date, have 
defied all attempts at reconstituting the science which their 
cyphers concealed. Nevertheless, several of its exponents 
were undoubtedly inspired by a knowledge of the genuine 
mysteries of this most secret of all sciences, which is the 
missing link in the chain which connects the New Aeon of 
the Child Horns with the ancient Cult of the Mother 
(Typhon). The latter was abolished by the Osirians who 
perverted its doctrines to political ends which required that 
the male or positive aspect of nature assumed supremacy 
over the female or negative current, and, as has been shown, 
the Negative Current is of paramount importance. The tantric 
tradition alone — in the present age — has preserved the 
correct formula which is reflected in the celebrated precept; 
Shiva is shava without shakti. 12 

It is because the human female is the natural repository, 
temple, shrine, or sanctuary, of the alchemical elements of 
transmutation, 13 that the Cult of Vama (i.e. Woman) re- 
emerges in the present Aeon of the Child as the Shadow of 
the Vulture, the bird of prey that is the special symbol of 
Maat (the Mother-Mouth). 14 

The vulture is the typical haunter of the dead, and like the 
hyena, is known as the ‘beast of blood’. The bat is another 
type of the blood-sucker and its habit of sleeping upside 

11 This science is known as the Srividya, Supreme Knowledge (i.e. Gnosis). 

12 Meaning that Shiva (consciousness) is inert (shava, a corpse) without shakti 
(power, movement, time, the kalas, etc.) The phrase appears in several tantras. 

13 Whether of base metals into gold, or of human consciousness into cosmic 

14 The vulture is pre-eminently a symbol of the mother-blood. 




136 Nightside of Eden 

down caused it to be used by initiates as a type denoting 
the reversion of the senses. Spare’s ‘death posture’ comports 
the same idea and so does the viparita maithuna of the 
Hindus. It is not so much the death of the senses that is 
implied, but the total reversion of the life-current contained 
in the elixirs secreted in the organism of the Initiates, who 
are then known as the Vultures of Mu. This comports the 
attainment of cosmic consciousness. 

The choice of the Typhonian totems was determined 
largely by certain physical characteristics such as the trance 
state of the bat and the retromingency of the hyena. It is, for 
instance, a litde known fact ls that the women selected or 
‘marked’ as competent in the secret tantric rites of reversion, 
are those who, apart from exhibiting particular magical 
aptitudes, possess also the anatomical peculiarity exemplified 
in such animals as the hyena and certain members of the 
felidae that urinate and copulate cluniatum. Gerald Massey 
has demonstrated the meaning of this symbolism, but he 
seems to have been unaware of its practical occult import. 

The subject is beset with great difficulties from an academic 
standpoint because of the physical nature of the Mysteries. 
It began to yield some of its secrets to the West when Sir 
John Woodroffe translated for the first time, and with 
initiated assistance, certain tantras which contain — however 
deeply hidden — the vital current of the Left Hand Path 
(Vama Marg). 

The tantras of the Vama Marg are today the sole reposi¬ 
tories of the genuine science of Srividya and of the Chandra- 
kala. This science, which had its origin in Egypt, was 
refracted in a distorted form into the Western Tradition 
where it was known as Al-Khem, or Alchemy. 16 Khem, the 
black land, was identified with Egypt 17 because the Kaf-ruti 
or black race achieved its apotheosis in that land. The source 

1 s See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 7. 

16 Al-khem-i, literally ‘of the black or red land’, i.e. Egypt, with Inner Africa 
implied. 

1 7 See Magick, p. 288. 


Typhonian Totems of the Tantras 137 

of the Draconian Current lay in Africa beyond Egypt, as 
Massey has amply demonstrated; but the occult significance 
of Khem is the dark radiation of the human female whose 
vaginal vibrations deposit the red earth of reification. She is 
the Black Goddess, Khem-Isis, Nu-Isis, the womb and birth¬ 
place of all manifested life. 



APOPHIS. 





*JE 

w 

1 r. | a 

Uf' 


n f>rs 

i {J j 

X • X 

V* 

1 Sift 

T vp* 

cffb 


o 12 





V# 

‘6 

[}' 

ba? 

If R 

N 

^ ! 
B rwvn 

jJflnfilj 

SUE 




’ m 

ir 

■Vji 

C2 

_E 

ON 1^ 

51] 

BO 

SU 


• 

1 


The Sigils of the 22 Sentinels of the Tunnels of Set 


Part Two: 

The Tunnels of Set 







The Sigil of Set, received by Crowley in 1912. 


‘As there is a door in the soul which opens on God, so there 
is another door which opens on the recremental deeps, and 
there is no doubt that the deeps come in when it is opened 
effectually’. 

A. E. Waite. 


And yet: 

‘Typhon, Juggernaut and Hecate were not less divine than 
the gods of the over-world, and the offices of Canidia were 
probably in their way as sacred as the peaceful mysteries of 
Ceres’. 


A. E. Waite. 




Introduction 


143 


Introduction 


THE THESIS developed in Part II is that the early myth 
makers, unable properly to comprehend the forces of Non- 
Being, cast them in a false mould from which they emerged 
as powers of ‘evil’. In consequence, myth and legend are 
alive with demons, monsters, vampires, incubi, succubi, and a 
host of malignant entities all of which are symbols that con¬ 
ceal unnameable, appalling gulfs and — to primordial man — 
unknowable concepts of Nothingness, Inner Space, Anti- 
Matter, and the ultimate horror of Absolute Absence. This 
‘other universe’ that we cannot know — for we are it, in a 
sense too intimate to fathom — has been hinted at by 
Qabalists and Gnostics. Some of their strange doctrines are 
re-emerging today wearing new masks curiously similar to 
their ancient ones, yet with an altered facial cast suggesting 
affinities with even stranger speculations. In some way as yet 
inadequately understood, Daath would seem to be a ‘black 
hole’ or gateway to the parallel universe represented by the 
other side of the Tree of Life. 

The twenty two cells of the Qliphoth represented by the 
twenty two scales of the Serpent relate to the Ophidian 
Gnosis as known to the ancients. It is here interpreted in the 
light of researches undertaken by such adepts as Aleister 
Crowley, Austin Osman Spare, Charles Stansfeld Jones, 
Michael Bertiaux, and others. 


The Janus-headed Beast, Choronzon-Shugal (333 + 333), 
facing inwards and ouwards at the Pylon of Daath, is identical 
with the Beast 666 of biblical lore and the devil-god wor¬ 
shipped ages earlier by the Yezidi under the name of Teitan. 

In his note on ‘Satan, Seth & the Yezidis’, 1 Richard 
Cavendish expresses his opinion that this ‘Devil-god of the 
Chaldean Mysteries is a figment’ of Alexander Hislop’s 2 
imagination. But Hislop was preceded by Gerald Massey 
whose monumental work, The Natural Genesis, was published 
in 1883. On page 367 of that work appears the original of the 
material later used by Hislop in his book. Massey observes 
that: 

Irenaeus 3 was in a measure right when he gave it as his conclusion 

that Teitan was by far the most probable name (of the Beast) 

although he was ignorant of the true reason why. 

Massey goes on to say that ‘Teitan is the Chaldean form of 
Sheitan, who is still adored by what are termed the Devil- 
Worshippers of Kurdistan, Shetain being our Satan’. 

Richard Cavendish also maintains that ‘Aleister Crowley 
naturally shared this misconception and approvingly brought 
the Yezidis into his own system. He wanted to spell the 
Devil as Shaitan, for one thing because it enabled him to 
begin the Enemy’s name with the Hebrew letter shin, which 
in cabalistic tradition is the letter of the Holy Spirit, and for 
another because something else beginning with “sh” attracted 
him’. 4 

This statement shows a misunderstanding of Crowley’s 
reason for espousing Massey’s (and through Massey, Hislop’s) 
sentiments concerning Shaitan; it also reflects the opinion of 
the most deluded of Crowley’s detractors, for it confuses the 
nature of the excrementitious matter to which the formula 
of Shaitan or Set refers. The matter has already been 
adequately explained. 5 What has not yet been considered is 

1 The Powers of Evil (RKP, 1975), pp. 263, 264. 

2 See The Two Baby Ions (Partridge, 1916). 

3 A gnostic writer of the second century. (Present author’s note). 

4 The Powers of Evil, p. 264. 

5 See Part I, chapter 7. 



144 


Nightside of Eden 


Irenaeus’ ignorance as to why Teitan was by far the most 
probable name of the Beast. Massey himself gives a clue to 
the reason on page 370 of his Natural Genesis where he 
says, apropos another aspect of the matter, ‘there can be no 
doubt the riddle is numerical’. 

The number 666 resumes the dual nature of the Beast as 
Choronzon-Shugal, and this explains the apparently con¬ 
tradictory description in Revelation of ‘the Beast that was, 
and is not, yet is’. The nature of ‘the Beast that was, and is 
not’ has been explained in the first part of this book; it yet 
remains to explain the Beast that ‘yet is’. 

The former Beast ‘that was, and is not’ is the negative 
side of the Tree; it is as it were the reflection of the qliphoth 
of the obverse side of the Tree which constitutes the domain 
of the magician. This is why Crowley claimed that Liber 
CCXXXI 6 ‘is true up to the Grade of 7° = 4 D ’, for beyond 
the Abyss, magick as a practical mode of being, ceases to 
obtain. 

The scheme that will be adopted here is based upon Liber 
CCXXXI which gives both the sigil and the name of the 
qliphah corresponding to each of the twenty two scales of 
the Beast that crawls along the twenty two paths, emitting as 
it goes the kalas and the bindus, and uniting the nectar of the 
woman with the venom of the Serpent. 

The twenty two paths of the Tree of Life transmit the 
influences of the eleven macrocosmic power-zones to their 
corresponding nerve-centres in the human organism. 7 There 
are thus 33 kalas in all, 32 of which 8 are of extra-terrestrial 
origin. Seven of them 9 are cosmic power-zones, and the 
remaining three 10 transmit extra-cosmic influences from the 
three forms of Nothing. 11 

6 See The Equinox, I. vii. 

7 i.e. the microcosm. 

8 Malkuth, being the earth, is excluded. 

9 Yesod to Binah inclusive. 

1 °Daath, Chokmah, Kether, attributed to Uranus, Neptune, Pluto, respectively. 

1 * Le. Ain Soph Aur, Ain Soph, Ain, See The Kabalah Unveiled, by S. L. 
MacGregor Mathers. 



i .ate 2: The Demon Feast Margaret Cook 





4: The Black Goddess of Space Michael Bertie 









lTE 5: Dwellers Beyond Daath Janice Ayers (Soror Tanith) 


































plate 16: The Goddess of the Future Michael Bertiaux (Photo by Nina Miller) 



plate 17: Creative Vortex Steffi Grant 




Introduction 145 

Part II of the present book therefore treats of the qliphoth 
or shadows of these power-zones as given in Liber CCXXXI. 
The secret rubric of this Liber is contained in the mysterious 
table appended to it. The only part of it that concerns us 
here exhibits the sigils and the names of the qliphoth which 
are given in their apposite places at the head of each of the 
22 sections that follow this introduction. The number 231, 
the number of the Liber upon which these considerations are 
based, is the sum of the numbers from 0 to 21, the extension 
of 22 and therefore the sum of the key numbers of the 
Tarot Trumps. 

Before describing the widdershins world of the Me on, or 
parallel universe, adumbrated in the kalas of the Tree it will 
perhaps be of assistance to the reader if I give a brief des¬ 
cription of the cosmic power-zones and their relationship to 
one another. 

According to the Grade system of the A.'.A.'., Kether (10° = 1 D ) 
equates_with Pluto, and Malkuth (1° = 10°) with Earth, Chokmah 
(9 - 2 ) o equates with Neptune, and Yesod (2° = 9°) with the Moon; 
Binah (8 = 3 d ) equates with Saturn, and Hod (3° = 8°) with Mer¬ 
cury; Gedulah (7° = 4°) equates with Jupiter, and Netzach (4° = 7°) 
with Venus, Geburah (6° = 5°) equates with Mars, and Tiphereth 
(5 = 6°) with the Sun. 

The eleventh power-zone, Daath, is attributed to Uranus 
and is the Abode of the Black Brothers, when viewed from 
the Sphere of Malkuth (Earth). The Black Brothers are rep¬ 
resented phenomenally by those who view the universe as an 
objective reality. The scientists are their prototypes. Daath 
being the Gate of the Abyss is the point both of ingress into 
noumenon and of egress into phenomena; in other words it 
is the gateway of the manifestation of non-manifestation. 

Choronzon (333) is Chaos in the sense of No-Word, typi¬ 
fied by the Beast whose explosive union with Babalon 12 
opens the Gates of the Abyss and admits the forces of 
Universe B’ (the Meon). The formula of Choronzon therefore 
has specific reference to the Wordless or Silent Aeon rep- 
12 The prototype of manifestation. 


plate 18: The Work of the Wand and the Work of The Sword Allen Holub 



146 Nightside of Eden 

resented in the Aeon of Horns by the speechless babe or 
Khart, Harpocrates (Hoor-paar-Kraat). 13 To this Aeon 
Crowley attributed the letter Zain (Z-Ayin) the Twin Forces 
of duality symbolising — the the ape of Thoth — the no-word 
of pre-human or ‘monstrous speech’. It is the silence of the 
Black Brothers, those who typify the atavisms of the Beast 
separated from their natural vehicle of manifestation: 14 the 
‘wrong kind of silence’. 1 s 

Zain is the sword referred to in AL. II. 37, concerning ‘the 
work of the wand and the work of the sword’, the wand 
being symbolized by the letter Beth. Hence the blasphemy 
of the homosexual formula, for it denies Babalon and breeds 
devils in chaos. The twin towers of the abyss therefore rep¬ 
resent unpolarised duality. They are the abode of the black 
brothers or twins — Set and his double Horus — Le Diable, 
the Devil in its positive phase, corrupt and perverse. Hence 
the typical formula of sodomy as applied to the rear of the 
Tree. 

The atavisms of the Black Brothers are the sterile stars 
born of the speechless or lisping 16 Aeon, for the Word may 
be vibrated without distortion only via the menstrum of the 
female. The entire machinery of the Roman Church, which is 
an inversion of the true ‘pre-Christian’ Gnosis, is powered on 
the inner planes by this formula of sodomy, as exemplified 
by some of their highest initiates. On the other side of the 
Tree, this formula is identical with that which Crowley 
designated Per Vas Nefandum . 17 

The Pylon of Choronzon is guarded in the form of Shugal, 
the ideograph of Set as the howler in the desert. 18 It is not 

13 Khart (Egyptian) also means the dwarf or crippled god, the speechless one, 
denoting non-manifestation, as if to balance the Aeon of the Nephilim or Giants 
who fell through the abyss into manifestation in the primal aeon. 

14 i.e. Babalon. 

1 s Crowley, in 777 Revised, p. xxv. 

16 ‘Lisp’ means ‘imperfect in utterance’ (Skeat). Middle English lispen, lipsen. 
Cf. lapse. 

17 See Aleister Crowley & the Hidden God, chapter 7. 

18 The word Goetia also means ‘howling’ and suggests therefore a grimoire 
of pre-human atavisms. 


' Introduction 147 

without interest that the name Al Azif which Lovecraft chose 
- as a title for his celebrated Necronomicon was, as he observes 

( ‘the word used by the Arabs to designate that nocturnal 

sound (made by insects) supposed to be the howling of 
demons’. 19 

Working downward from the Pylon of Daath, represented 
I by the Word, 20 Tiphereth appears below the horizon of 

the Abyss as the Black Sun, the symbol of which - the 
Couleuvre Noire — conceals the ecstasy of the ‘hideous 
god’ 21 whose image is the reverse of the Beauty typified by 
Tiphereth in the world of phenomenal existence. 

The explosion of orgasm in Daath vibrates the Word of the 
Black Snake and of the Goddess whose inner symbol is the 
Couleuvre Rouge. These are the twin serpents Ob and Od, of 
^the Kalinian Current. Tiphereth thus represents the solar- 
* phallic Will: the Firesnake at the acme of its phenomenal, 

and perhaps human, apotheosis. 

Flashing yet further down the Tree we reach Netzach, 
which typifies the creative imagination inspired by sensual 
1 love which is mirrored in reverse by the ‘fantasy of the 

flesh’. 22 The Hod aspect of the Tree represents the power- 
zone of the mind, which vitalizes the mechanism of mental 
magick. Hod is under the aegis of Mercury and functions 
’ through the formula of Narcissus; hence the VIII° O.T.O. 

praxis. Its reverse formula is veiled by the image of Azathoth, 
the Idiot God featured in Lovecraft’s Chthulhu mythos. 
Netzach (Venus) and Hod (Mercury) are balanced by the 
i moon in the sphere of Yesod, the Place of the Secret-ion. 23 

This is the sphere of astro-etheric, or IX° magick. Its reverse 
is the formula of sorcery involving the black atavisms of 

19 See Lovecraft at Last, by Willis Conover, page 104. 

I 20 The visuddha chakra in man. Note that this chakra has 16 petals or kalas 

and is therefore the height or eighth kala in both male and female organisms 
when it blossoms in maithuna. 

21 Liber A’ash vel Capricomi Pneumatici (Crowley), verse 2S. 

22 The phrase is Austin Spare’s. The averse aspect of Netzach combined with a 
certain lunar admixture motivated his art which was a celebration of such fantasy. 
( 23 See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 8, for one of the most important dis¬ 

coveries concerning the meaning of AL. Ill, 39. 







I 48 Nightside of Eden 

Gamaliel, the Obscene Woman whose symbol is the ass. The 
Foundation or Fundament is a name of Yesod and it is the 
source of the secret ion, for it conceals the Eye of Set, one of 
whose titles is ‘The Eater of the Ass’. This is the ‘eater of 
dung, the afflicted in the Day of Be-With-Us’. 24 This resumes 
the most secret formulae of the magical paths of Kali. These 
forces are finally earthed in Malkuth, the zone of reification 
and of Matter’s ‘earthing’ or incarnating. The mirror-meaning 
of Malkuth is implicit in the formula of the Death Posture 25 
as a mechanism of disintegration and dissolution, which once 
more releases Matter from 1° = 10° to become 10° = 1 D 
again. The formula of Malkuth, as of the Death Posture, is 
the averse of the X°. 26 } 

The Throne (Malkuth) is the complement and opposite 
of the Crown (Kether). Kether transmits the Plutonian 
Current that leads - via the tunnels of Set - through the 
triple Veil of the Void to the depths of inner space. It is this 
transmission that is followed here through the tunnels of 
Set. The web-like network of the Tree with respect to these 
tunnels and power-zones resembles a ‘worm hole’ that begins 
at Malkuth and ends at Kether. 27 This is the jump through 
super-space typified by the voltigeurs, or vaulters, and by the 
voodoo vibrations of ‘jump’ rhythm as exemplified in the 
music of Count Basie. The vaulters are typified by the frog¬ 
headed goddess Hekt, so named because the ancients — 
observing the peculiar action of the leap-frog - attributed 
this creature to the leapers in the waters (of space). Hekt, 
meaning a ‘frog’ was the Egyptian original of the Greek 
Hecate, the goddess of the trivia (three ways): the Ways of 


24 ‘Dung’ and ‘affliction’ in this context are connected with the lunar current 
as explained previously. 

p* S " Ima f es Oracles of Austin Osman Spare, Part II. Also The Book 
cJUte?™' bV ^ °‘ Spale ’ rcprinted “ 1975 by 93 Publishing, Montrial, 

_. 26l ''• ^ X ° O T O ’ which represents the Throne of Administration of the 
Order. See Cults of the Shadow, p. 138. 

27 Hie physicist Taylor uses the simile of worm holes and a doughnut to des¬ 
cribe super-space. Hie paragraph quoted on page 90 (supra) implies with equal 
aptness to the voids behind the Tree. q 


Introduction 149 

| 4116 VHI°, IX°, and XT, which resume the secret formulae 

j of psycho-sexual magick. 

{■ Pluto, the outermost Pylon, is also — by analogy - the 

Innermost, for outer and inner space become identical at 
that point in subjectivity where subject and object, noumenon 
and phenomenon, negate eath other. Similarly, the Couleuvre 
(' Noire, or Snake of the Dark, is identical with the Couleuvre 

Rouge when tinged with the fire of the risen Kundalini. 
Again, by analogy, the Death Posture is that of backward or 
upside down birth 28 which symbolizes rebirth in and through 
{ the nightside of the Tree. 

To recapitulate: Daath, the Gateway of the Abyss, con¬ 
tains the Double Tower or Devil Tower that is the Pylon of 
Choronzon. Tiphereth is the Phallus of Fire (the Fire Snake) 
j reflected as the Black Sun or Snake of the Dark ( Couleuvre 

Noire). Venus or Netzach symbolizes the eye and its ligh t 
the ‘fantasy of the flesh’. Mercury is the god of mental 
magick whose qliphotic reflex is the Idiot God or the lunar 
qliphoth; and Malkuth is the zone of the atavisms of Zos. 29 

It should be remembered that Daath, the eleventh cosmic 
kala is in a recondite sense identical with, and overlaps in 
time-space, the 31st kala which is the kala of The Aeon, 
ascribed to both Fire and Spirit. The remaining 22 kolas are 
of the Paths and will be treated in due course. The attri¬ 
butions of the chakras to the cosmic kalas — as concentrated 
through the Sephiroth — are as follows: 

Pluto channels the influence of Nu-Isis from Outside. 30 
The influence permeates the power-zones from Chokmah, the 
Sphere of the Stars, to Geburah, the Sphere of transcosmic 
energies connected with the blood of Isis. The complex 
Chokmah-Binah-Chesed-Geburah is the womb that receives 
( the extra-terrestrial influences which include those from 

Inner Space upwelling from Daath. These influences condense 

2 8 Hence the tradition that a wizard or witch is bom in this fashion. 

2 9 See Images and Oracles of Austin Osman Spare, Part IL 

30 i.e. from spaces beyond the system comprehended by the glyph of the Tree 






150 Nightside of Eden 

to form the Veil of the Abyss streaked with the lightnings of 
Uranus that, illuminate the Pylons of Choronzon. In that flash 
of lurid luminosity the Pylons and the Gateway are seen as 
one with the network of tunnels fleetingly revealed. This entire 
magnetic field comprehends the Sahasrara-Brahmarandhra- 
Ajna complex. 

Daath, on the other hand, equates with the Visuddha 
chakra and represents the Word, and therefore MAN, the 
Speaking One. This is reflected in the waters of the abyss 
backwards, and is symbolized by those retromingent beasts 
that typify Choronzon and Shugal, the howler in the icy 
wastes of Nothingness. This is the Chaos of Creation and 
Annihilation. 

Tiphereth equates with the Anahata chakra and the heart 
of the Tree. It represents the solar-phallic Will (93) embodied 
in the Fire Snake. Its shadow is the Black Sun typified by 
the Couleuvre Noire. 

Netzach equates with the Manipura chakra, the creative 
imagination of which the animal representative is woman. 
She is the Eye of Zos that weaves the fantasy of flesh by 
reproducing its image as a reflection in the waters of the 
abyss. 

Hod equates with the Svadistthana chakra, the mind that 
organizes the fantasy but which, as in the myth of Narcissus, 
is obsessed with its own beauty and is bound to the formula 
of self-love through masturbatory techniques such as those 
of the VIII°. The Idiot God is its reflex; also the Drooler. 31 
This formula becomes creative only when allied to that of 
Netzach, the lotus of the Manipura in the lake of the mind. 32 
The magical weapon of Narcissus is the Hand which balances 
the Eye of the Woman, in Zos Kia Cultus 33 Mercury rules 
the sphere of mental magick; his image is the dog and the 
ape, both notorious masturbators. 


„ l 1 Se f * e desaripticm of the Guardian in A Separate Reality , by Carlos 
Castaneda, Part Two, The Task of‘Seeing’. 

32 Le. the inner woman aroused from sleep by intense integral yoga. 

3 3 See Images & Oracles of Austin Osman Spare, Part II. 


Introduction 151 

Yesod equates with the Muladhara chakra and represents 
the astro-etheric fluid that is the menstruum of sexual magick 
utilized by Adepts of the IX°. Its reflex constitutes the 
sorceries of the XI° (the reversal of the IX°), symbolised by 
the Ass of the Obscene Woman, Gamaliel. Its application to 
the mercurial god is an abomination, as Crowley expresses it 
in Magick (p. 165). 

Malkuth is below the chakras in the sense that the qliphoth 
are below the sephiroth. Malkuth represents reification, 
earthing, the incarnating of spirits, daemons, or intelligences 
inferior to or superior to man. The reflex of Malkuth is 
disintegration and the incarnation of unstable forms of 
existence such as elementals, demons, etc. It is the antipode 
of Pluto (Kether), and represents the slime of Satan spawning 
in the outer spaces beyond the far-flung rim of the known 
universe. In this sense Malkuth is the anti-pole of the starspate 
of space beyond Pluto. 

In order to bring the information contained in this Part II 
within the comprehension of human terms the reader may 
find it useful to consider the Tunnels of Set as a network of 
dream cells in the subconscious mind. Each tunnel relates to 
the path under which it runs, much as the neural ganglia may 
be said to underlie the skeletal structure of the human 
organism, and it functions in several dimensions simul¬ 
taneously. There are thus unavoidable, even necessary, inter¬ 
relations and interlockings of the paths and the tunnels which 
they conceal, but it should be understood that the influences 
permeating the paths have their origin, not in the tunnels 
themselves (which are merely conduits or passages of transit) 
but from beyond the Gate of Daath. 

Although having no actual position on the Tree, Daath is 
yet the power-zone or event-act that makes possible the 
entire scheme of Sephiroth, Paths and Tunnels, with all their 
ramifying complexities. If this is understood there should be 
little difficulty in following the allocation of ideas and 
concepts to each of the dream cells. 

Being as it were a commentary on the left hand paths of 




152 Nightside of Eden 

the Tree of Life, this book concerns itself more especially 
with the back or reverse side of the Tree. My sources of infor¬ 
mation are the Qliphoth, the names and sigils of which are 
given in Crowley’s Liber CCXXXI. The sound and colour 
scales used in the evocations of the sentinels of each tunnel 
or cell are given in each case, and the colours assigned to the 
sigils have been drawn from the Earth or ‘Daughter’ Scale of 
Colour as given in Liber 777, column xviii. The sound-keys 
are derived from the researches of an Adept whose marginal 
annotations in Crowley’s personal copy of 777 enabled me to 
allocate the correct vibration to the pertinent demon or 
qlipha. These keys have not heretofore been published. Also 
unpublished in the posthumous edition of Liber 777 34 is the 
material forming an additional column entitled Typical 
Diseases, which also appeared in manuscript in Crowley’s 
personal copy. As these diseases pertain essentially to the 
qliphoth, I have included them, although Crowley’s list is 
known to have been tentative. 

Another important item that was omitted from the first 
and the later editions of 777 are the magical formulae rele¬ 
vant to the Paths, which, in their application to the qliphoth, 
should be considered as an extension in depth, and in a 
negative dimension, of the psychosomatic complex relevant 
to the path in question. Here again the list was tentative and 
Crowley omitted to ascribe formulae to all of the Paths, 
probably because he had not worked out a satsifactory 
scheme. I have not presumed to finish the work he left undone 
but have included the attributions that he did work out, 
more as a matter of academic interest and by way of com¬ 
pleteness than for any practical value they may or may not 
possess. 

The actual method of magical evocation has not been given 
explicitly because of the obvious dangers involved, and 
because its abuse, either through accident or design, is only 
too likely to occur. The proper technique will however be 
evident to those who have read my Typhonian Trilogy. It will 

34 Known as 777 Revised, Neptune Press, London, 1959. 


Introduction 153 

consequently also be plain to such readers that the use of a 
crystal is not advisable, for in the event of such use the 
qliphoth would inevitably be constrained to manifest on the 
hither side of the Tree, and the imbalance thus generated by 
the vacuum created on the other side of the Tree could cause 
havoc in the subjective universe of the skryer. It is because 
the operator must launch him- or herself into the tunnels 
themselves that the dangers of mishap are ever present, the 
greatest being that he will be overwhelmed by the conditions 
existing in the alien dimensions he has entered; the least 
being that he may lose himself in the intricate maze of 
tunnels, cells, and tubes, with which the other side of the 
Tree is honeycombed. 

It is of the utmost importance, therefore, not to imagine 
this network as precisely following the pattern of the obverse 
side of the Tree, although the major tunnels of the left hand 
paths do underlie those of the right. However, as a main vein 
or nerve in the human body has a multitude of auxiliary and 
capillary vessels ramifying from it, so do the cells of the 
qliphoth contain tunnels and tubes that are not only easy of 
access — once the main gate has been opened — but positively 
create their own swirling vortices into which are sucked any 
stray entities that are in the unfortunate position of not 
‘knowing the sacred alignments’. 35 

Assuming that the foregoing remarks will be heeded, the 
twenty two scales of the Serpent of the Qliphoth that writhes 
through the tunnels of the Left Hand Paths of the Tree will 
now be described in sequence from eleven to thirty-two, the 
first ten infernal power-zones having been comprehended in 
the first part of this book. 

3 5 The phrase is Austin Spare’s. 




1 


Amprodias 


THE Eleventh path or kala is attributed 
T to the element Air and its negative aspect 

A ' *****1 i s the demon or shadow known as Ampro- 
^ f J dias whose sigil is here given and whose 
V _ L number is 401. This shadow may be evoked 
by vibrating the name Amprodias in the 
kpy of ‘E’.'The sigil should be painted in luminous pale yellow 
on a square ground of emeral flecked with gold. 

401 is the number of Azoth which signifies the ‘sum and 
essence of all, conceived as One’. In its negative phase this 
essence is conceived as None and is the Void from which 


manifestation proceeds. 2 The nature of this void is also 401 
as ATh, the Hebrew word meaning ‘out of’; its root is the 
Egyptian Ut, whence uterus, the gate of outrance. It is out of 
the womb of the Ain, via Kether, that manifestation issues. 


The sigil of Amprodias exhibits a gaping mouth typical of 
the uterus which utters the Word. This Word is the Hidden 


Light, the symbol of which is the whirling cross or swastika. 
It is identical with the letter A or aleph, the letter attributed 
to the eleventh path. In the magical grimoire CCXXXI, the 
following verse pertains to this kala: 


1 litis should rise from a barely audible sussuration to a piercing whistle as of 
air being forced along a narrow pipe. 

2 Manifestation can proceed only from non-manifestation. This truism should 
be realized, it is the profoundest truth of the mystical path and full understanding 
of it confers the key of ultimate Initiation. 





156 Nightside of Eden 

A, the heart of IAO, dwelleth in ecstasy in the secret place of the 

thunders. Between Asar and Asi he abideth in joy. 

The thunderbolt, or dorje, is the lightning-borne weapon 
of the Hidden Light that streaks downward from the void, 
reifying as it does so earth or matter. The number 401 is also 
that of the word ARR which means ‘cursing’. It is the primal 
curse of the Fire of the Spirit imprisoned in bodily form, 
described in the Holy Books as ‘the Wrong of the Beginning’, 3 
the beginning being considered as Kether, through which 
flash the lightnings of the Ain or Eye of the Void. 

The animals ascribed to this kala are the Eagle and the 
Man. Man represents the highest embodied form of the god¬ 
head; the eagle is that cherub of Air that pervades the highest 
aethyrs in the form of intelligence: i.e. consciousness directed 
by extra-terrestrial or ‘divine’ will. But the inmost significance 
of this path is summed up in the magical power of the eleventh 
kala which is that of divination. This depends upon the divine 
or supra-mundane aspect of spirit that rays into the womb 
and fecundates the virgin earth with Light (intelligence) 
from beyond the ultimate Pylon (Kether). Divinatory power 
is the intuitive aspect of intelligence and as such its course is 
as unpredictable as the forked lightning which cleaves the 
womb of space and manifests as the thunderbolt — the A 
between the I and the O. 4 The mystery of the thunderbolt 
is explained in CCXXXI. Therein, the swastika of the 
eleventh path is compared with the fulguration of path 28 
(q.v.) which contains the mystery of the transformation of 
the holy virgin. She appears ‘as a fluidic fire, making her 
beauty into a thunderbolt’ (i.e. a swastika). This symbolizes 
the ‘Force that restores the world ruined by evil’, i.e. by the 
primal curse or Wrong of the Beginning. 

On the magical plane the divinatory power manifests in 
the irrational, thus the greatest masters of Magick traffic con¬ 
stantly with the energies of the eleventh kala. The irrational 

3 See Liber VII, v. 42; Liber LXV, iv. 56, and elsewhere. 

4 The formula of IAO has been analyzed in Aleister Crowley & the Hidden 
God (chapter 7). 


Amprodias 157 

element appears so strongly in magicians using this kala that 
their work has often not been taken seriously or has been 
altogether overlooked. A recent example is H. P. Blavatsky, 
whose antics cast such doubt upon the authenticity of her 
work that few in her time were able to estimate her at her 
true worth. Similarly, Crowley’s clowning placed him in an 
even more dubious category. Few indeed understand that the 
eleventh path is that of the Fool who dances on the brink of 
the abyss, as depicted in tarot trumps ascribed to this path. 
Salvador Dali, whose practical jokes are notorious, has also, 
at times, brought discredit upon his artistry, although many 
people fire impressed by the wealth which his artistry has 
amassed. The occultist Gurdjieff also falls into this category. 5 
His book Letters to Beelzebub has been described as a com¬ 
plicated practical joke, thus, again, deliberately obscuring the 
vital import of a teaching that is meant only for the few. Did 
not Christ also speak in parables so that he would not be 
understood? 6 

The key note of the musical scale ascribed to Amprodias — 
‘E’ — is, as He, the letter of the womb of the virgin impreg¬ 
nated by the Fool. 7 In accordance therewith, the River of the 
Underworld ascribed to the eleventh kala is Acheron, which 
receives spirits as the womb receives the creative lightning. 
The arch-devil of this path is Satan himself, Lord of the 
Powers of the Air ( aleph ) through which the thunderbolt 
streaks. 

Eleven is the number ascribed to the power-zone (Daath) 
within the abyss. The colour attributed to Daath is Lavender, 
or Pure Violet, which typifies the colour beyond space that 
vibrates in unison with the kala activated by the evocation of 
Amprodias. It is the colour of the Madman; he that is 
without the range of normal intelligence. The negation of 
reason that typifies his state of consciousness is consonant 
with the positive side of this path which is ascribed to that 

5 See David Hall’s excellent study of Crowley and Gurdjieff. 

6 Luke 8,10. 

7 See The Book of Thoth, by Aleister Crowley. 



158 Nightside of Eden 

part of the soul known as the Ruach, or Reason. More cor¬ 
rectly, the ruach is the breath of spirit, the whirling seed that 
impregnates the virgin of space and brings to birth innumer¬ 
able worlds. 

The bodily organ corresponding to this symbolism is the 
nose, the organ of breath and the vehicle of the olfactory 
sense. This attribution helps to explain the olid phenomena 
connected with ‘satanic’ operations. The stench of the 
incense employed in medieval rites was the gross and outer 
veil of an interior spiritual fact. Hence, one of the magical 
weapons associated with this kala is the fan, which disperses 
the fetid vapours that envelop the magician as he evokes the 
demon of this kala. But the prime instrument is the dagger of 
air, that is to say the weapon that ruptures the hymen of the 
virgin aethyr (represented by the Black Egg of Spirit) and 
exhibits the awful deity beyond the rim of the ‘universe’; he 
who sits at the Centre of All, the mad god celebrated by 
Lovecraft under the name of Nyarlathotep, 8 the god sur¬ 
rounded by ‘idiot flute players’. 

The flute is the Pipe of Pan, and he who lifts this veil and 
peers beyond is bereft of reason and of sense. In other words, 
he sees the truth of things in its naked brilliance and he re aliz es 
that that again is but a veil of the primal sacrament attainable 
only by the supreme formula of annihilation, for this is the 
ultimate path, which leads - via Kether - to the Great 
Inane (Ain). 

Eleven, being the ‘general number of Magick, or Energy 
tending to change’, 9 the eleventh path represents particularly 
the path of reversal and the point of turning back from the 
hither to the other side of the Tree. 

The disease typical of the eleventh path is the ‘flux’, which 
in magical terms is expressed as unbalanced or ‘untimely’ 
discharges of lunar energy. It is therefore the kala of the 
Black Moon-Blood. It warns of a leakage of vital fluid 

*Th e faceless’ god. Cf. the ‘headless’ one of the Graeco-Egyptian text used by 
Mathers in his translation of the Goetia. 

9 777 Revised (Crowley). 


Amprodias 159 

which, on overflowing, forms a residue of unbalanced magical 
energy. This breeds phantoms that appear in the form of 
sylphs; elementals associated with air or aethyr. Like the 
fairies and sprites of childrens’ tales they are, more often 
than not, depicted as diaphanous and beguiling creatures. But 
in the aspect in which they manifest on the negative side of 
the Tree, they haunt the awful chasms of inner space where 
they appear in semblences of utmost horror which obsess the 
magician and sometimes drive him literally out of his mind. 
They then invade the vacated space and, like leeches, drain 
the blood of the mind 10 into their own organisms. This is 
the origin of the myths concerning magicians imprisoned in 
outer space, 11 their minds secreted in transparent cells that 
float through the gulfs of the void like immense bubbles, 
increasing in size and luminosity as the invading sylphs draw 
more and more vital energy from the fluxes that have 
attacked the unwary intruder on this path. 

These creatures were dimly sensed by Lovecraft. 12 He 
describes them as ‘shapeless entities composed of a viscous 
jelly which looked like an agglutination of bubbles’. 13 A 
similar description is applied to the semi-entity Yog-Sothoth. 
The passage is quoted in The Magical Revival (p. 116) where 
attention is drawn to the close similarity between the pheno¬ 
menon described and the sphere of irridescent globes incor¬ 
porated by Crowley in the design of his personal magical 
pantacle where they appear behind the inverted Pentagram 
of Set. 14 

The highest initiations alone can confer immunity from 
these vampires that sail on scintillant wings. Fairy lore has 
disguised these creatures with charming veils that conceal 
the horror of their pursuits and contacts with the denizens of 

1 °Mind-stuff or chittam. 

1 ^ee page 255. 

12 Lovecraft called these bubbles shoggoths. A similar word exists in the 
Chaldean language, viz: shaggathai. The Beth Shaggathai was the House of Fornica¬ 
tion, and this suggests the sexual undertones contained in the name of the ‘viscous 
jelly’, or slime, that is the primal vehicle of the creative seed. 

13 At the Mountains of Madness, Lovecraft, p. 63. 

14 This pantacle is reproduced in The Magical Revival at p. 52. 



160 Nightside of Eden 

alien systems of consciousness in the nethermost regions of 
the cosmos. Arthur Machen, the Welsh writer who knew 
more of these matters than he cared to admit, notes this 
penchant of the faeryologist for whitewashing these airy 
beings and depicting them as fair entities. 15 

The title of the tarot trump ascribed to the eleventh kala 
is the ‘Spirit of Aethyr’. On the hither side of the Tree this 
spirit is more resplendently beautiful and luminous than 
words can describe, but its reverse or reflex is as described 
above; so also are the bubbles blown by the Fool of the 
Tarot in his mad career on the edge of the pit. 

The number of Amprodias concentrates into 5, the most 
mysterious and mystical of numbers in the cosmos, and 
beyond it. Lovecraft hints at the influences it denotes when 
he alludes to the ‘quintile mathematical tradition of the Old 
Ones’ 16 and their cyclopean structures and dwellings based 
upon the shape of the five pointed star. In AL, I. 60, Nuit 
describes her symbol as ‘The Five Pointed Star, with a Circle 
in the Middle, & the circle is Red. My colour is black to the 
blind . . .’ All these ideas pertain to the eleventh path. 17 The 
red circle is the black’ moon or moon of blood, the five 
points or star rays are the vaginal vibrations of the female 
during the five day flood. The five pointed star is also the 
glyph of the transcosmic Old Ones; and the Egg of Spirit 18 
is black to the blind’, or those whose spiritual eyes are not 
open and who are, therefore, like the virgin who later 
assumes the form of ‘fluid fire’ as the thunderbolt. 

The African concept Afefe has been attributed to the 
eleventh kala. 19 Afefe is ‘the wind’, and it is precisely here in 
the most primal symbolism known that we discover the 
identity of the serpent as a symbol of creative potency, the 
ruach or spirit. Afefe became the Apep or Apap snake of the 
Draconian Mysteries in Egypt. The Afefe-Apophis is also the 

15 See The White People (Machen), Introduction. 

16 At the Mountains of Madness (Lovecraft), p. 86. 

17 ‘My number is 11, as all their numbers who are of us.’ 

1 8 The symbol of A hash or Space is a Black Egg; it also typifies Spirit. 

19 See Cults of the Shadow, p. SO. 


Amprodias 161 

origin of the Fafnir Worm of Norse myth, and, as Massey has 
shown, a modem derivative is our word *puff’, ‘to blow out’ 
in the sense of becoming big, swollen, tumescent or pregnant. 
The African Afefe therefore reveals the ‘bellying’ or billowing 
force of the wind that is the gust or ghost which became — in 
a later recension of the Mysteries - the Holy Ghost that 
impregnates the virgin in the form of the Dove, the typical 
bird of the air. This is further corroborated by the fact that 
the genius of the wind, of which Afefe is the ‘messenger’, 
dwells in the grand temple of Legba, the African phallic deity 
that in the later cults was equated with evil owing to his con¬ 
nection with the mysteries of sex. 

The letter ‘A’ in the formula IAO is identical with Apophis 
and is the field of operation in which the magical energies 
of the I and the O (the phallus and the kteis) polarise and 
perform their creative function. 






Baratchial 


163 


2 


Baratchial 


THE TWELFTH path or kala is attri¬ 
buted to the planet Mercury and its 
shadow masses in the form of Baratchial 
whose sigil this is, and whose number is 
260. The sigil should be painted in a 
yellow deeper than that used for the 
sigil of Amprodias, upon a vesica-shaped plaque of indigo 
rayed with violet. The name Baratchial should be vibrated 
in the key of ‘E’, as with the previous sentinel, but there 
should be a suggestion of ‘chattering’ or ‘tittering’ accom¬ 
panying the vibration, which should not be even. 

260 is the sum of the series 8 being 

the number of Mercury as a cosmic power-zone. 260 is the 
number of Tiriel, the Intelligence of Mercury, so we shall 
expect to find a very precise reflection and inversion of this 
entity in the depths of the abyss where the path becomes a 
tunnel transmitting infernal influences. And this we do in 
fact find, for 260 is also the number of TMIRA, the ‘con¬ 
cealed’ or ‘hidden’, and of KMR, ‘a priest’, not of the Light 
but of the Dark, for KMR means ‘blackness’, its root being 
the Egyptian Kam, ‘black’. Yet although the 12th path is that 
of the Magician or Magus, the black or hidden priest should 
not be identified with the black magician, but with the 
Black Brother. 


This is the kala of the Sorcerers, the Monnim (also equal to 
260) who transmit the light direct from beyond Kether to 
Saturn via the formula of duality. 1 Duality is expressed 
zoomorphically by the twin serpents Od and Ob, 2 and by the 
ape — the shadow of the Magus who, according to tradition, 
distorts and perverts the Word of the Magus thus making a 
mockery of his work, as do the Black Brothers with their 
formula of duality. 3 

This is evidenced by the symbols of Baratchial: two swords 
with intumed blades, suggesting intense concentration on 
the ego as opposed to the Self of All, flanking a ghostly face 
(mask) surmounted by a crescent moon. The sigil is a glyph 
of falsity and illusion reflected in the current of duality that 
reveals the Shadow of Thoth in the image of his ape or 
cynocephalus. 

This doctrine is expressed in the second verse of CCXXXI: 
The lightnings increased and the Lord Tahuti (i.e. Thoth) stood 
forth. The Voice came from the Silence. Then the One ran and 
returned. 

The One is Kether, and it returned to its own power-zone 
because the vibration of this kala is illusory and cannot trans¬ 
mit truth. Its vibration duplicates that of the previous kala, 
thus creating a mere simulacrum of the creative spirit. 

The Black Brother is double tongued, as the serpent, which 
is significant, for the magical power ascribed to the obverse 
aspect of which this path is the tunnel, is the Gift of Tongues, 
the Gift of Healing, and a Knowledge of Sciences. The healing 
here however is the healing of the ego, which merely aggra¬ 
vates with illusion the disease of false identity creating 
thereby a chain of endless suffering. Likewise, the Sciences of 
which knowledge is given are the sciences of darkness. Yet it 
must not be supposed that these sure necessarily evil, it is 
merely that in the hands of a Black Brother they necessarily 
'The letter beth which is ascribed to the 12th kala, is synonymous with our 
word both, implying duality. 

2 But not in their balanced form as on the obverse of the Tree. 

3 i.e. illusion. It is the 1 reflected that becomes 2. Likewise 11, eleven, is the 
number of those ‘who are of us’. 




j 3a.ratch.ial 


164 Nightside of Eden 

tend to sterility because directed towards the fulfilment of 
wholly personal ambitions. The dark sciences of this path 
contain the secrets of the kalas of the void, and of that 
Kalinian Current which obtains in the widdershins world of 
anti-light. 

The witches and wizards of this tunnel speak with Voices’ 
that are reflected into the aura of the Adept by the mecha¬ 
nism of unnatural acoustics associated with the mysterious 
ventriloquism of Bath Kol, the Voice of the Oracle. The bath 
or beth is the house or womb of the supreme kala, and of the 
source of that ventriloquism that was primal in the myths of 
man, for the Word was endowed with flesh and issued from 
the belly of the mother. Here again the number of Baratchial, 
260, corroborates the doctrine of this path of beth for it is 
the number of MINMON, ‘pleasures’, ‘delights’, and of 
IRKIK, ‘thy thighs’, which reveals the sexual nature of 
these pleasures. 

The disease typical of this path is Ataxaphasia which here 
refers specifically to disorders of the faculty of speech, 
typified by the bestial howlings or cachinnations of the pre¬ 
human creation and by that ‘monstrous speech’ (mentioned 
in Liber VII A ) that thrills beyond the veil of the void. 

The dangers attendant upon the use of this kala are 
extreme, yet the advantages that may be gained would seem 
to outweigh them in that the Adept is able to transcend 
the merely conceptual transmission of imagery. He is thus 
able to manoeuvre specific atavisms at a level deeper than 
those he could penetrate as a Magus. This is because the 
silence of the outer spaces, like the music of the spheres, may 
be apprehended only when the ape-like chattering of the 
Magician’s vehicle 5 has been subdued by contact with the 
transcosmic forces that sweep through this tunnel from the 
pathways of the Great Inane. The latter is the Ain, or Void, 
the unwinking eye which emits invisible rays that reify within 
the innermost sanctuaries of the Adept’s non-being. He then 

4 Prologue of the Unborn, verse 10. 

5 His senses. 


165 

becomes The Magus of Power 6 in a true and totally different 
sense to that in which this power has been understood in 
any previous aeon. For that power ( shakti ) is primal and does 
not exist apart from the shadow, the solidification of which 
is the entified Magus whose Word is but falsehood and 
glamour. 

This particular kala shows clearly how the face of the Tree 
is — and can only be — a facade. This is so because a reified 
and therefore dualistic interpretation of the hidden currents 
of energy, that pulse through the tunnels on the other side of 
the Tree, transmit the energies of Non-being. It is in this 
sense that the ‘One ran and returned’. To where did it return? 
The manifested Word returned to the silence of non¬ 
manifestation. 

6 The title of the tarot trump equated with the obverse path. 



3 


Gargophias 


The Thirteenth path is charged with 
w the lunar kala. The name of its shadow- 
f guardian is Gargophias which should be 
( vibrated or ‘howled’ in regular repetitions 
in the key of ‘G’ sharp. 1 Her sigil should 
be painted in silver on a black circle. Her 
number is 393, a number of supreme importance in the 
Draconian Cult in its Thelemic phase. The number 393 con¬ 
tains the numbers 39 2 and 93 3 . The obverse path is concerned 
with AL, while the tunnel here treated is concerned with LA. 
Furthermore, 3 + 9 + 3 = 15 = Atu XV, The Devil ; and 393 is 
thrice 131, the number of Pan and of Samael 4 whose wife is 
the elder Lilith, the Lady of Night, or Not, the Great Nega¬ 
tive. 393 is also the number of ShPhChH, the typical 
concubine or whore who later became Sefekh, the consort 
of Thoth. Sefekh means the number seven; she is therefore 
an image of Typhon. 

According to Gerald Massey, Sefekh is a survival of 
Khefekh or Khepsh of the Seven Stars, once worshipped at 
Ombos as the ‘Living Word’. By the later, solar cults she was 
abhorred as the Great Harlot. The word khepsh means, 

‘The liquid nature of this entity suggests that the evocation be accompanied 
by some stringed instrument such as the vina, the zither or harp. 

Thrice times 13, the number of this tunnel. 

8 Thrice times 31, the number of AL, God, and of LA, Not. 

'•The pivot or Centre of the Zodiacal Qliphoth. 



Gargophias 167 

literally, the hinder thigh, a symbol of the vagina which is 
itself an image of the Primeval Typhon, the Mother of Set. 
She typified the first parent known at a time when the role 
of the male in procreation was unsuspected. Because she had 
no consort she was considered to be a goddess without a 
god, and her son — Set — being fatherless was also godless 
and was therefore the first ‘devil’, s the prototype of the 
Satan of later legends. 

One of the totems of Typhon was the Dove. This was 
continued by the solar cults where it typified the male bearer 
of the ruach or creative spirit, attributed to the element air. 
The dove depicted on the Great Seal of the Ordo Templi 
Orientis (O.T.O.) is the Typhonian bird of blood, and it can 
be shown by gematria that the emblems contained in that 
seal are qabalistically equivalent to the number 393. 



The all-enclosing vesica is the Venusian Door 6 — Daleth — 
which is the number 4. The eye 7 in the triangle or pyramid 
of Spirit 8 is 370. The Dove, Holy Ghost, Geist or Gust 9 
denotes the element air and the letter Aleph, 1. The Graal or 
Chalice into which the dove dives is represented by the letter 
Clieth, 8; and the Yod within it, the secret seed or bindu at 
the heart of they antra, is 10. The total numeration is thus 393. 

Further, 393 is the number of Aossic. 10 The ‘missing’ or 

5 See Cults of the Shadow , p. 51. 

6 See description of Tunnel 14. 

1 Ay in = 70. 

8 Shin = 300. 

9 Cf. Guest as the visitor or one who ‘blows in’. 

1 °The name of a Great Old One whose influence is transmitted by the present 
Head in the Outer of the O.T.O., viz: Kenneth Grant. 



168 Nightside of Eden 

hidden 4 is the Venusian Circle at the heart of the sigil of 
Aossic: 



In this sigil the Goddess is concealed because she abides 
above the Abyss on the path joining Chokmah and Binah. 11 
The integers of 393 (3 + 9 + 3) total 15; 1 + 5 = 6, the number 
of the sun. The integers 3x9x3 multiply to 81 = 9 = the 
number of the moon. 12 393 multiplied by itself produces the 
number 154449. Notice the persistence of the number 15 
(Atu XV) which is attributed to Baphomet, the Devil, and 
therefore to the God Set. The number 444 is that of the 
Brazen Serpent and of TzPRDO, meaning ‘frog’, from the 
Egyptian Khepr-ta, the frog-headed god of the earth. 13 The 
number 9 is that of the moon and of Yescd, the place of the 
secret-ion of the Yezidi. 14 

Astro-symbolically, 393 is Satum-Luna-Satum, the Moon 
warded on either side by the God Set. A remarkable property 
of the number 393 is that it reduces to Unity, viz: 3 into 9 is 
3; 3 into 3 is 1, which is AChD, 13, ‘Unity’. Applying the full 
formula of the Pentagram (i.e. 5 x 5 = 25) to 393, the Key 
Number of the Great Work is obtained: 393 + 25 = 418. 15 

393 is less 666 16 by 273, which is the number of AVR 
GNVZ, the ‘Hidden Light’, and of ABN MASU HBVNIM, the 
‘stone which the builders rejected’; also of ARBO, meaning 

11 See next section, 4. 

12 81 is the mystic number of the moon which rules the 13th kala ; it is also 
the number of ALIM, the formula of witch-craft. Note that 15 + 81 =96 and 
9 + i 6 3 = 15 ‘ A1SO ’ 6 + 9 = 15, which denotes, again, Atu XV! 

The symbolism of the frog is of major importance in all formulae asso¬ 
ciated with the other side of the Tree. See remarks infra, pp. 172, 173. 

4 See Cults of the Shadow, Glossary, under head ‘Yesod’. 

1 S F°r considerations of this all important number, see Crowley’s Liber 418. 
and the Commentaries to AL. 

16 The number of Shugal-Choronzon, the Great Beast of the Abyss. 


Gargophias 169 

‘four’, in this case the ‘hidden light’ of the door ( daleth ) at 
the heart of the sigil of Aossic. 

393 is less 718 17 by 325, which is the mystic number of Mars, 
the planetary vehicle of Ra-Hoor-Khuit,and of NORH, the vir¬ 
gin or damsel equating with the Goddess Kali in her lunar 
aspect. The persistence of the number 9 is also remarkable. 

393 multiplied by 3, the number of units of which it is com¬ 
posed, equals 45, and 4 + 5 = 9. 45 = ADM, ‘man’, ‘species’, 
composed of ‘A’, breath or spirit, and DM, blood, the mystical 
lunar liquid. 45 is the mystic number of Yesod; it is also the 
number of MAD, the Enochian word for God, while the 
series of numbers from 1-9 (i.e. 45) is the number of AGIAL, 
the Intelligence of Saturn or Set, and of AMD, the Fool. 18 

The sigil of Gargophias shows an upright sword, with an 
eye each side of the blade, set over an egg and crescent. The 
sword is typical of the Woman as the first cutter in two. The 
haunch or thigh constellation of sickle shape was the celestial 
symbol of Typhon which, in terrestrial terms is the vagina of 
the woman that divides and becomes two; the slit or bifur¬ 
cating One. The two eyes represent the dual lunation, 
celestially, and the two phases of the feminine cycle with 
emphasis on the periodic eclipse. The egg is three-quarters 
full, which indicates the nine months of gestation, the dry 
phase immediately preceding the deluge characterized by the 
outgush of the amniotic fluid. This aspect of the formula 
is latent in the egg and does not manifest until the 15th path, 
the Path of the Mother. The animal sacred to this kala is the 
stork (traditionally associated with childbirth), the dog, 
companion of the virgin huntress, 19 and the camel. The 
camel 20 is the chief totem of this path for it traverses the 
desert of the Abyss; it is the traditional ark or ship of the 

17 The Abomination of Desolation, and of the number of the Stfli of Reveal¬ 
ing. (See the Typhonian Trilogy). 

1 *ADM, or Adam, derives from the Egyptian Atem, the Mother Goddess of 
Time and Periodicity identified as Typhon. 

19 Artemis in her lunar phase. 

20 The letter attributed to this path is gimel, which means a ‘camel’; it is in 
fact very similar to the English word. 




170 Nigh tside of Eden 

desert. Its humps contain the vital liquid of life that sustains 
the Adept during his crossing. 

The 13th path is thus the path of the Virgin who contains 
within herself the unawakened potential of the wife who is 
ascribed to the next path. The position of these two paths 
- 13 and 14 - constitutes the Sign of the Cross. The Abyss is 
the place of crossing over from the world of appearance 
(phenomenon) represented by the obverse of the Tree, to 
that of dis-appearance (noumenon) represented by the hind 
side. 

The magical powers of the kala of the moon include clair¬ 
voyance and divination. Not the kind of divination associated 
with the eleventh kala (q.v.) which issues ventriloquilly via 
the open womb, but divination by dreams emanating from 
the ‘sealed womb at night’, 21 i.e. when the lunar light is 
eclipsed. 

The 13th, 14th and 15th kalas , resuming as they do the 
full formula of the female, form the Primal Cross or place of 
crossing over from the material world into the world of 
ghosts or spirits. The virgin menstruates and is sealed, dark, 
unillumined, unawakened; the wife or whore is open* 
awakened, her formula is love; the mother again is sealed, but 
after a different fashion for she brings forth what is shut in 
her womb. 

The menstrual incense of the 13th kala assumes the forms 
of lemures. Although most lexicons derive this word ‘from 
the Latin lemures , pi. spirits of the dead’ 22 the term con¬ 
notes more than the ghosts of the departed, for the 13th 
tunnel is haunted by the ape-like teratomas spawned upon 
the 12th path which seep into the lunar miasma via the 
sleep of the virgin. Thus, the description given (in lexicons) 
of the terrestrial lemur provides a more exact definition: 
kinds of nocturnal mammal . . . allied to monkeys’. 

According to an initiated tradition from which Blavatsky 

21 See The Magical Revival, p. 132. 

22 The Concise Oxford Dictionary. 


Gargophias 171 

drew much information, the atavisms of Lemuria 23 swarm 
upon this path 13 in monstrous shapes reminiscent of, yet 
vastly more hideous than, the natural lemur. Lovecraft hinted 
at them more than once and the idea of them prompted him 
to observe that 

. . . there is about certain outlines and entities a power of sym¬ 
bolism and suggestion which acts frightfully on a sensitive thinker’s 
perspective and whispers terrible hints of obscure cosmic relation¬ 
ships and unnameable realities behind the protective illusions of 
common vision. 2 4 

The unnameable realities are denizens of the tunnels of Set 
which swarm with the shells and shadows of things that have 
not yet been entified but which tend to become. Their subtle 
stresses in the ether cure the mirrored — yet unmanifest — 
latencies of the magician himself. 

The fluid plasma of the astral light that permeates the 
tunnels is alive with potential that becomes manifest only 
when it comes to the surface of the Tree, splits into myriad 
forms, and swarms through the black hole in space rep¬ 
resented by Daath, the Gateway to the Abyss. The manifes¬ 
tation of the non-manifest is effected, magically speaking, 
via the lunar current which characterizes the High Priestess 
of this kala in her virginal, unawakened, or ‘dreaming’ phase. 
The verse in the grimoire applicable to this kala reads: 

Now hath Nuit veiled herself, that she may open the gate of her 
sister. 

Not two women, but one only is implied by this statement. 
Nuit veils herself in sleep, i.e. she becomes virginal, men- 
struous, in order to open the gate of her sister — the gate of 
dreams. In a naturalistic sense the veil is the clothing assumed 
by primitive woman at the onset of puberty. In a physio¬ 
logical sense it is the unruptured hymen. When Nuit opens 
the gate she veils herself and is therefore able to divine by 
dreams seen in the mirror of magical sleep or trance. This is 

23 A stratum of larval and pre-human consciousness long ante-dating even the 
epoch of Atlantis. 

24 The Case of Charles Dexter Ward (Lovecraft), p. 195. 



172 Nightside of Eden 

the sense in which virginity, or the state of ‘sleeping’, is here 
intended. In yet another sense, the opening of the gate refers 
to' the gate of the mother of Path 15 (q.v.) wherein the 
unmanifest is made manifest as the birth of the child through 
the gateway of matter. But this is a later formula and belongs 
properly below the Abyss, whereas the Gate here intended is 
the Gate of the Abyss itself. 

The disease typical of this path is not surprisingly sub¬ 
sumed under the general label ‘menstrual disorders’, but it 
should be understood that whereas this disease is applicable 
to the path, the corresponding disorders obtaining in the 
tunnel beneath the path comport disorders of the lunar 
current itself, and the consequent spawning of lemurian 
horrors. This is substantiated by the magical weapon of the 
path, the Bow and Arrow. In the Tarot Trump attributed to 
this kala, the High Priestess is shown with the bow and arrow 
across her thighs. The bow is also a glyph of the rainbow 
which has a direct mystical connection with the lunar 
formula. 2 s 

The symbolism of the bow, as the emblem of Sothis, the 
Star of Set, and of the rainbow, has been treated in detail in 
the seventh chapter of Aleister Crowley and the Hidden God. 
Here it is necessary merely to note that in ancient Hebrew 
the name of the rainbow - qesheth or qashed is a qabalistic 
synonym of qadosh, a method of sexual magick involving the 
use of the lunar current. This form of occultism is sometimes 
confused with homosexual techniques that are in no way 
cognate. 

The specific magical formula of kala 13 is ALIM, 26 the 
number of which — 81 — is the number of witchcraft presided 
over by Hecate, or Hekt, the frog-headed goddess. It is neces¬ 
sary to guard against interpreting the term witchcraft in its 
usually accepted sense, which does not pertain to these 
higher levels of the Tree. The real meaning of witchcraft is to 
be sought in the image of the frog which has a secret signifi- 

25 See The Lost Light (Kuhn), p. 281. 

26 A term signifying the ‘Elemental Gods’. 


Gargophias 173 

cance for initiates that is far closer to the concept of Love- 
craft’s batrachian fantasies than is the puerile assessment 
of the subject by mediaeval churchmen, witch-hunters and 
present day ‘revivalists’. 

The Frog or Hekt was an early symbol of the transformer 
from aquatic to terrestrial life. It was chosen by the initiates 
of the Draconian Mysteries as a symbol of that which trans¬ 
formed in the waters of the abyss and came upon dry land. In 
other words, it was a glyph of the invader from the ‘waters of 
space’, i.e. from the other side of the Tree. Furthermore, the 
frog’s curious leapings suggested the formulae whereby 
certain paths of the Tree could be crossed or vaulted 27 by 
Adepts of the ‘other side’. 

In Egypt the transformer as the Hekt was incorporated in 
the Ur-Hekau, the ‘Mighty One of Enchantments’ 28 which 
was the prototype of the magical wand whereby the priest 
opened the mouth of the dead and transformed the mummy 
into a living spirit. Thus the ‘dead’ this side of the Tree 
became the khus or ‘living spirits’ the other side. 29 

The number of the Frog is 353 which is also that of NGSh, 
meaning ‘sexual intercourse’, from the Egyptian nak, ‘to 
fornicate’. The name Hecate means ‘one hundred’, which is 
the number of qoph, ‘the back of the head’, or cerebellum, 
where, as Crowley notes ‘the creative or reproductive force 
is primarily situated’. 30 353 is also the number of the initials 
of the two magical instruments — the P(hallus) and the 
K(teis) — which in conjunction engender the illusion of the 
universe. 31 The Frog, Hekt or Hekate is therefore the leaper 
or jumper in the sexual sense as well as in the mystical sense 
wherein the Adept uses the formula of the Voltigeurs at the 
back of the Tree. 

The bow appears in connection with the earliest (i.e. the 

27 Cf. The Voltigeurs of the Cult of the Black Snake discussed in Cults of the 
Shadow, chapter 9. 

28 See The Book of the Dead. 

29 See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 3. 

3 0 Magick (Crowley), p. 183. 

31 Qoph is the letter attributed to the Tarot Trump entitled The Moon. 






174 Nightside of Eden 

African) symbolism of the 13th kala where it is associated 
with the hunter in moonlight, Ochose. The reference is to the 
lunar current. The two sacred lagoons, Togo and Once, are 
also symbolic of this kala. Togo, which means literally the 
‘red water’ formed the basis of the Egyptian Pool of Punt or 
‘Red Sea’. The lagoons played an important part in the 
administration of law in Africa. The earliest laws or tabus 
were connected with physiology and the phenomena of 
menstruation and the rite connnected with its onset and sub¬ 
sidence. The ‘rite’ time thus became the right time (for sexual 
coupling), and infringements of tabu were visited with severe 
punishment. It is at this primordial level that the idea of 
guilt became associated with sexual intercourse. It should be 
understood, however, that the birth of ‘sin’ which occurred 
at such an early period in the evolution of sociology was the 
actual beginning of ‘time’ itself, in the sense that menstrua¬ 
tion was one of the first signs of a period, or cycle of time, 
noted by primitive man; the earliest probably being light and 
dark, day and night. It was after these observations, not 
before, that the division of the year into periods became 
increasingly more detailed and complex. The recurrence of 
physiological phenomena was primary and it drew mans’ 
attention to the recurrence of celestial phenomena. Firstly, 
the stellar appearances and disappearances, risings and settings; 
then the lunar phases; and finally the solar cycle, when time 
became fully evolved and the year as we know it was 
calculated. 

Prior to the earliest observation of physiological pheno¬ 
mena, that is when time was not known, much less registered, 
Chaos reigned. But, inevitably, the forces of chaos were 
drawn into the vortex of time, and mythology contains 
accounts of the conflicts that raged between the giants of the 
abyss which occurred outside time and which had elemental 
types as their vehicles 32 and the new types that were estab¬ 
lished in the form of stellar, lunar, and finally solar deities. 
The latter were the kronotypes, the gods of time or chrono- 

32 Such as wind, rain, earth-quake, thunder and lightning, etc. 


Gargophias 175 

logy. All these were anthropomorphized and became the 
various gods and goddesses that were finally attributed to the 
planets, which were considered as the vehicles of their powers. 
Hence the first ten paths of the Tree are attributed to Earth, 
Luna, Mercury, Venus, Sol, Jupiter, Mars, Uranus, Neptune, 
Pluto. The 13th kala is thus essentially and very peculiarly 
the kala of Kali (time), and of Chronos or Kronos and the 
Kronotypes. 








177 


4 

Dagdagiel 



The FOURTEENTH tunnel is suffused 
with the kala of Venus represented by the 
Whore. Her qabalistic attribution is Daleth , 
meaning ‘a door’; the door that permits of 
access to her house or womb, and egress 
from it. Her cosmic power-zone is Venus. 

This tunnel backs the first Reciprocal Path on the Tree of 
Life; its infernal counterpart is the base of the pyramid 
which, when inverted, is balanced upon the point of the Ain 
in the void of the Abyss. The name of its sentinel is Dagdagiel. 
She may be evoked by vibrating her name in the key of ‘F’ 
sharp accompanied by a crooning or lilting sound. Her sigil 
should be painted in vivid sky blue on a circle of bright rose 
rayed with pale green. Her number is 55, which is a mystic 
number of Malkuth, the power-zone of Earth. Fifty-five, as 
5x11, resumes the formula of magick (11), set in motion or 
powered by shakti (5). It is also the number of DVMH, 
‘silence’, which is the formula of woman ( shakti) when she 
becomes pregnant with the child of light produced by the 
next kala. The word HEM, ‘to swell’, is indicative of this con¬ 
dition; and IHM (a metathesis of HIM) means to ‘conceive’, 
‘to have sexual intercourse’, and ‘to create’, 55 is also the 
number of KLH, ‘the bride’, ‘the daughter-in-law’, which 
suggests the cosmic bride Malkuth, the daughter of IHVH, 
she that is the final term (He) of manifestation. 


The daughter is the symbol of imminent return; of the 
incipient reversion of manifestation to its primal state of non¬ 
manifestation; of being re-becoming non-being. In the present 
Aeon the Son is the Child, but in the coming Aeon of Maat 
the Child will be the Daughter , for at the end of that Aeon 
Malkuth will once more return to its sleep of dissolution 
(pralaya ) prior to a new manifestation. 

The idea of matter coming to an end recalls the statement 
in AL (I. 66): ‘The Manifestation of Nuit is at an end’. 1 The 
title of the Atu of this Path is The Daughter of the Mighty 
Ones. The theme is repeated by the word MUT (a form of 
Maat) which also adds to 55 and which signifies to ‘shake’, 
‘waver’, ‘totter’, ‘fail’, ‘decay’, ‘die’. It derives from the 
Egyptian word mut, meaning to ‘end’ or ‘die’. 

The sigil of Dagdagiel shows the letter Daleth reversed and 
in the form of a gallows from which hangs an inverted 
triangle above the letters AVD. AVD (Od) is the magick light. 
The triangle is the inverted pyramid set in the Abyss with its 
apex in the Void (Ain), for this reciprocal tunnel is reflected 
into the gulfs beyond Kether. 

The implication is that the pyramid is the magick light or 
Fire Snake suspended from a gallows in the form of the 
Woman of Night 2 whose vagina ( daleth = door) is here 
reversed. This peculiarity shows that she is an initiate of the 
highest sexual mysteries and that she possesses the special 
mark 3 of a Scarlet Woman. Her totems are the dove (the 
Typhonian bird), the sparrow, 4 and the sow. In a holograph 
note in his personal copy of Liber 777, Crowley notes 
against this path (column xxxvii): The Sow = type of Venus 
which matches Mars (opposed to romantic and other higher 
types). Mars = boar’. By this he means that as the virgin basks 
in the idyllic light of romantic or unrealized love, the sow 
wallows in the sty of sensuality. But the comparison of the 

!See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 8, for the meaning of this ver»e and its 
rdation to the secret ion implied by the formula of the daughter. 

He. Lilith, the whore. 

3 The retromingent vulva. See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 7. 

4 Noted for its lubricity. 





178 Nightside of Eden | 

Sow of Venus with the Boar of Mars comports another ! 

mystery which may be fathomed only in terms of the 
Draconian Current. The sow (Babalon = whore) is the qlipha s i 

or outer shell of the Goddess. Her inner mystery involves the 
kalas or Kali Herself, for She is the ultimate Mother. In New j 

Aeon terms, therefore, Mars is the cosmic power-zone 
assigned to Ra-Hoor-Khuit as the child ( Har ) of the present j 
Aeon, because the blood associated with this zone (of Mars) 
is not the blood of the male shed in battle, but the blood of 
the female that embodies the child. 6 

The dove also is attributed to the 14th kala. 1 The dove j 

was the bird of blood (feminine source) before it became the ( 

bird of air (masculine spirit). First was Mars-Kali-Typhon, 
then came Venus-Nephthys-Nu-Isis. ] 

The magical power corresponding to this kala is, tradition- ! 

ally, the ability to distil love philtres. The phrase is an ( 

euphemism for the vaginal vibrations emanating from the 
virgin in the form of sexual magnetism that attracts the | 

Creative Light into her womb. 

In the verse of the grimoire pertaining to this kala, it is ( 

written: 

The Virgin of God is enthroned upon an oyster-shell; she is like a 

pearl, and seeketh 70 to her 4. In her heart is Hadit the invisible 

glory. f 

The oyster is the typical aphrodisiac; the virgin is drunk 
upon its shell and seeketh 70® to her 4. 9 In her heart is Hadit 
(i.e. Set, the Devil Himself), the invisible glory that motivates 
her desire. The virgin thus becomes the whore, or, in the 
language of magical symbolism, the entranced priestess 
becomes enlightened or awakened; the pythoness becomes 
oracular, being inspired with the divine spirit. Hence the 
magical formula of this kala is Agape, the number of which j 

5 Qliphah , ‘an harlot’. j 

6 See chapter 10, Aleister Crowley and the Hidden God, for the rdle of the 

Martian Current in the New Aeon. ! 

7 See remarks on the previous kala, 13. : 

8 i.e. the erect phallus symbolized by the Eye (Ayin = Eye = 70) of the Devil. j 

9 Daleth, 4, = door (i.e. vagina). 1 


Dagdagiel 179 

is 93, which is the number of desire or will ( Thelema ) and of 
the Devil (Aiwass) Himself. 

All aphrodisiacs and ‘all soft voluptuous odours’ are 
ascribed to this kala, the presiding deities of which are 
Hathor, Aphrodite, Kapris Cottyto, and, in the tantric 
systems, Lalita, 10 the sexual aspect of shakti (power). 

It is, however, upon the African Tree that the most sig¬ 
nificant attributions are to be found. In the primordial 
magic of Equatoria this 14th kala is ascribed to the goddess 
Odudua, the goddess whose secret temple at Ado, near 
Badagry, swarmed with the consecrated priestesses of her 
cult. They earned it the name of the City of Whoredom, of 
which Babylon was a later type. To the Ogboni 11 she was 
known as Be, the Earth. 

The 14th ray or kala unites the cosmic power-zone of 
Odudua (Binah) with that of Once or Anansi (Chokmah), 
symbolized by the Spider which later became the supreme 
symbol of the Cult of the Obi (Obeah). These two power- 
zones are the field of activity of the Obeah and the Wanga, 
the ‘work of the wand and the work of the sword’. 12 The 
symbolism of this verse (from AL) has been explained at 
some length in Aleister Crowley and the Hidden God ; here it 
is necessary to draw attention to the symmetry of the 
spider’s web. In the tunnel underlying the 14th path the web 
is not structured upon a plane surface but occupies various 
planes so that — from the point of view of an observer 
working upon this path — the criss-cross filaments produce 
a crazy geometry. From within the tunnel, and viewed from 
behind the Tree, however, the web is seen to form with 
infinitely tenuous threads of gossamer light the curious 
apertures of darkness that admit to gulfs of space between 
the back and front of the Tree. At the midmost depth of this 

10 The Lilith of rabbinical lore. It is interesting to note that Lalit was the 
earlier Rent (the Sow). See remarks on page 177. The letter V became, by a pro¬ 
cess of elision, the letter T. 

11 An African secret society. In its esoteric aspect it is a body of doctrine 
comprising all the kalas and the formulae of their magical use. 

l*AL. IL 37. 





180 Nightside of Eden 

tunnel the primal magical spell was cast and the first of all 
magical circles (webs) was formed. It is here that the Snake 
and the Spider meet in one symbol. The snake is OB, the 
lunar current from which Once weaves his web. Serk, 13 
symbolized by the scorpion, thus unites the spider and the 
serpent in one glyph. The ‘work of the wand 14 and the work 
of the sword’ 1 s are identical. Their fusion is the work of the 
Obeah and the Wanga which is accomplished via the 14th kala. 

The word Aud (Od) which appears in the sigil of Dagdagiel 
is the magical light which flows from the yoni of Odudua. In 
this tunnel of Odudua, therefore, this appears as the pyramid; 
it is the triangle (yoni) in a further dimension and surrounded 
by the web of filaments, or by the ring of fire, with which 
the spider and the scorpion are respectively associated. 

In his Magical Record, Crowley speaks of the tunnels or 
caverns of fire through which he was guided by a spirit fox 
during his higher initiations. The fox or jackal, as already 
shown, is a zootype of Shugal, the god-form of Shaitan- 
Aiwass. Its complement is the amorphous entity Choronzon, 
the Guardian of the Pylon of Daath which forms the apex of 
the pyramid and is the gateway to the network of tunnels 
that slope down the back of the Tree. 

The spider’s web is the network of tunnels that leads to 
other dimensions, for what appear as mere interstices on a 
flat plane when the spider has emerged from its hole are — 
in the depths of lie (the earth) — intra-spatial voids and 
dream-spanning gulfs of cosmic immensity. The Obeah and 
the Wanga are therefore the dual modes of transformation 
whereby the human entity is translated into further dimen¬ 
sions via the vortices of the void. 

Diseases typical of the 14th kala are syphillis, gonorrhoea, 
and nymphomania. These are glossed by the attribution to 
this kala of the most abhorrent of African fetishes, Champana, 

13 Goddess of the Circle. Serk and Circle are synonymous in later language. 

14 The wand is that of the Magus, Chokmah, ruled by Chozzar (Neptune). 
See remarks concerning Chozzar and Choronzon on page 191. 

1 s The sword is the woman, or divider in two. She is typified on the Tree as 
Binah whose planetary representative is Saturn (i.e. Set). 


Dagdagiel 181 

the deformed deity whose symbol is a gnarled club leprous 
with red and white spots. The element of nymphomania is 
evident in the succubi or shadow-women generated from the 
yoni of the Goddess whose magical weapon is the girdle. 
The connection with the dream mechanism is obvious 
although there is a more esoteric explanation. The shadow- 
woman is the means of dream control for it is through her 
cincture or magical circle that the dreamer enters dimensions 
that lie on the nightside of the inverted pyramid which is a 
projection of the yantra of the Goddess. The formula has a 
sexual basis and all that can be divulged 16 has already 
appeared in my Typhonian Trilogy. 

It is interesting to see how nearly H. P. Lovecraft 
approached the frontiers of these alien dimensions. In The 
Case of Charles Dexter Ward he alludes to the ‘sign of Koth, 
that dreamers see fixed above the archway of a certain black 
tower standing alone in twilight ...’. The black tower is the 
Phallus of Set, the standing stone set in the twilight of the 
Abyss, i.e. in the crepuscular state between dream and the 
‘dark abyss of sleep’. The word Koth or Kotha appears 
among the barbarous names of evocation which the Gnostics 
used in their Agapoi, some of which Crowley restored 
qabalistically and used in Liber Samekh, the central grimoire 
of the New Aeon that contains the ritual known as Congressus 
cum Daemone. This is one of the most potent rituals extant, 
according to Crowley; it contains the formulae of congress 
with the double or shadow-self. 17 In the elemental section 
ascribed to the element Earth, Kotha appears as the name of 
Hathor, the voluptous Goddess of Sexual Pleasure ‘whom 
Satan, beholding, desireth!’. Kotha is there translated as 
‘Thou hollow one’, the final ‘a’ being evocative. Koth there¬ 
fore signifies the hollow one, the tunnel that is symbolized 

16 Not for reasons of secrecy (see General Introduction) but because the 
formula may not be communicated in dualistic language but only in the depths 
of the dream itself. 

17 It was ‘the Ritual employed by the Beast 666 for the Attainment of the 
Knowledge and Conversation of his Holy Guardian Angel’. See Magick p. S55 
etseq. 


182 


Nightside of Eden 

by the vagina of the female which emits the tenuous plasma 
responsive to the slightest impress of the magically directed 
will. Concerning this elemental section of the grimoire 
Crowley observes that the ‘conception is of Earth, glowing, 
inhabited by a Solar-Phallic Hippopotamus 18 of a Venereal 
nature’. 

The word ChVTh, a form of Koth meaning ‘the beast of 
the reeds’ 19 has the number 414 which is that of the Limit¬ 
less Light (Ain Soph Aur), one of the triple veils of the void 
beyond Kether. It is also the number of AZVTh (Azoth), 
the fluid, i.e. the supreme secretion or kala that dissolves all 
molecular structure with its infinitely corroding light. Love- 
craft has conceptualized this notion in terms of his own 
scientific materialism as Azathoth, the blind and idiot chaos 
at the centre of Infinity. 20 The name Azathoth is composed 
of two distinct concepts, Aza and Thoth. According to 
W. Henning 21 Az is ‘the evil mother of all demons’. Coupled 
with Thoth, one of whose types is the dog-headed ape or 
cynocephalus, she resumes the feminine side of the guardian 
of the Abyss. 22 Azoth comprises the initial and final letters 
of the alphabets of three ancient languages: Aleph and Tau 
(Ath) in Hebrew; Alpha and Omega, in Greek; A and Z, in 
Latin. 

The word Koth as Cheth ( ChITh ), 418, is of vital impor¬ 
tance in the New Aeon for it is the number of the Great 
Work in its highest alchemical phase, viz: the dissolution of 
all molecular structure, 23 as adumbrated in Al. II. 44. 24 

18 The hippopotamus is sacred to Hathor. As Crowley observes: ‘The idea is 
that of the Female conceived as invulnerable, reposeful, of enormous swallowing 
capacity etc.’ In other words an apt symbol of the engulfing jaws of the abyss. 

19 ChVTh (Koth) ‘the beast of the reeds’ (Psalm. Ixviii) was an image of Egypt. 
The word derives from Khebt, the hippopotamus, a zootype of Egypt in the 
North, i.e. Lower Egypt, the Typhonian region. 

20 In Crowley’s system Hadit is Chaos at the heart of Infinity (Nuit). 

21 See The Birth and Origin of Primal Man according to the Manichaeans* 
quoted in The Gnostic Religion , by Hans Jonas, p. 341. 

2 2 See Part L where the identity Thoth = Daath has been demonstrated. 

23 Cf. ‘the dissolution, and eternal ecstasy in the kisses of Nu’. 

24 The number of this verse, 44, is the number of DM (blood) which is the 
magical image of the Scarlet Woman whose kola forms the subject of the present 
chapter and whose ‘tunnel’ is the abode of Dagdagiel. 


5 


Hemethterith 


THE FIFTEENTH tunnel is illumined by 
* * ' the kala of the Star, known in the Book of 


. y Thoth as the ‘Daughter of the Firmament; 
the Dweller between the waters’. She is 
^also the Mother-aspect of kala 13, the 
Virgin, and of kala 14, the Whore. The 
letter assigned to both Mother and Daughter is He, the 
number 5, and the Pentagram is her seal. The two waters are 
respectively the blood of the virgin daughter and the milk 
of the enceinte mother. 1 

The Guardian of this Pylon is Hemethterith who may be 
evoked by vibrating her name in the key of ‘A’ sharp, whis- 
peringly, almost inaudibly. Her number is 1054 which is that 
of the Greek word Naos, meaning a ‘ship’ or ‘ark’, also the 
‘navel’ and hence the womb. Her sigil should be inscribed in 
lurid red on a glowing red inverted triangle. It suggests a face 
above three equal-armed crosses arranged in the form of a 
descending triangle with two serpentine forms dividing the 


The relevant versicle of CCXXXI reads: 

Now riseth Ra-Hoor-Khuit, and dominion is established in the Star 
of Flame. 

1 Hence the attribution to this kala of the coconut. See Liber 777, column 




184 Nightside of Eden 

■This is a reference to the child Horus manifesting in the 
form of Ra-Hoor-Khuit as the son of the Mother. The a nim al 
sacred to this kala is the peacock, one of the sacred symbols 
of the Yezidi who worship Shaitan under this form. The 
peacock is also the vahana of Kartikeya, the Hindu Mars, 
bom of the element fire. 

In alchemical terms, the 15th kala is that of Sulphur 
purifying by fire; in other words, the Mother is redeemed by 
the birth of the son. Note that Path 15 links Chokmah, the 
Sphere of the Magus, with Tiphereth, the Sphere of the Son. 

The other vehicle sacred to this kala is the Eagle, the 
Kerub of Aquarius presiding over the 15th Path. Aquarius 
plays a vital role in the symbolism of the New Aeon. It is 
the place of the North attributed to Nuith who brings forth 
the two waters depicted in the sign of Aquarius as two 
undulating lines. In the Tarot Trump attributed to this sign a 
woman is seen pouring the waters from two jars. 2 The seven- 
pointed Star of Venus above her is identical with the seven- 
rayed Star of Babalon, the Seal of Set which comprises the 
Mother and Child in one glyph. This is also the Star of 
Sothis, the planetary representative of which is Venus. Seven, 
or Sevekh, was the primal goddess of the seven stars ( Ursa 
Major) of the planisphere, and these stars or rays were the 
seven heads of the Dragon of the Deep that later appeared 
in the Christian myth as the Beast of the Apocalypse. The 
Star of the 15th kala is therefore the Star of Sothis or 
Shaitan, and it is concealed in the feminine generative essence 
known as the soul or blood of Isis. 

In The Magical Revival it has been shown how Shaitan may 
be invoked by the magical use of this current. Set was the first 
male child bom of the Mother and the eighth after the seven 
stars or souls . He was considered by the ancients therefore as 
the height or fulfilment of the Mother. This explains the 
cryptic utterance that ‘Venus is transcended in Sothis’, for the 
child (Set) transcends the mother in the sense here indicated. 

2 See The Book of Thoth (Crowley). This Atu has been reproduced in Aleister 
Crowley & the Hidden God , Plate 9. 


Hemethterith 185 

Chokmah, the Sphere of the Stars, thus pours down its 
kalas along the 15th Path into the power-zone of the Sun- 
Son, Ra-Hoor-Khuit (i.e. Tiphereth). 

The magical siddhi associated with this kala is Astrology 
which — on the other side of the Tree — has a very different 
connotation to that which it usually obtains, for it is there 
the genuine science of the stars, or kalas, and differs as much 
from the popular conception of astrology as does the Tarot 
from the vulgar playing-card game. 

The stellar energy that flashes its light through this tunnel 
is symbolized by the Dog Star, Sothis, and the nature of the 
child bom in this cell of Hemethterith is satanic in the sense 
that it is procreated by a magical method involving the use 
of the Eye of Set. 3 

The Behemiron, meaning the ‘bestial’, are the qliphoth of 
this kala, and their name refers to this magical formula. 4 

In the African mythos the goddess Odudua reappears on 
this Path in the form of the mother or wet nurse, hence the 
connection with Aquarius and the two waters. The goddess 
Iyemoja also belongs to this path. Her name means the 
‘mother of fish’. She was raped by her son, Orungan, 5 and 
during her flight from him she fell backwards, her breasts 
burst open and became two streams. 

3 Hie formula pertains to the XI° O.T.O. 

4 See previous note. 

5 Orungan is a type of the element Air, and therefore a form of the Holy Ghost. 





Uriens 


187 


6 

Uriens 


THE 16th Path Transmits the influence of 
the Hierophant, and its tunnel is sentinnelled 
by the demon Uriens who is evoked by 
vibrating his name in the key of ‘C’ sharp. 
The name should be roared or, more properly 
bellowed. His sigil should be inscribed in 
lines of flame 1 on a brown triangle. It shows a seven-armed 
figure; the upper four arms terminate in yods\ the lower 
three, in crosses. The seven-armed figure is a glyph of the 
Tree of Life. 2 It has relevance to the worlds below the abyss. 
The seven also refers to the original Light in Heaven rep¬ 
resented by the stars of Ursa Major (see previous section). 
This interpretation is confirmed by the fact that 395 — the 
number of Uriens — is also that of HShMIM, the ‘heavens’. 
The seven arms, the four yods, the three crosses, make a total 
of 59 in all (7 + 40+12) and this number furnishes a wealth 
of clues relevant to the meaning of the sigil. 

According to the Kabbalah Denudata 3 59 is AChIM, 
meaning ‘brethren’; it refers particularly to Samael who is 
stationed in the midst of the Zodiacal Qliphoth accompanied 
by his shakti, the Elder Lilith. She guards the South East 

1 i.e. in flame-coloured lines. 

2 The upper three sephiroth (the Supemals) are not always included in dia¬ 
grams of the Tree. 

3 Translated by S. Liddell MacGregor Mathers ( Kabbalah Unveiled). 



Comer and her companions are the Serpent and the Man. 
The serpent is a glyph of menstruation and 59, as NDH, 
means precisely this. It derives from the Egyptian word neti, 
meaning ‘being’, ‘existence’, ‘negative’, ‘froth’, ‘the sign of 
bleeding’, ‘female source’. This number therefore explains 
why the Adimiron (The Bloody) are the qliphoth attributed 
to the Tunnel of Uriens. In the list of Primes, 4 Crowley 
describes 59 as ‘The Yoni calling for the Lingam, as ovum, 
menstruum, or alkali’. Furthermore, and to endorse the 
interpretation, the word ZNB (59) signifies ‘tail’ or 
‘extremities’. 

The name Uriens suggests Oriens who, as Atlas, supported 
the universe on his shoulders. The idea of support or bearing 
is borne out by the general symbolism associated with this 
kala which endows the Adept with the magical siddhi of 
physical strength. 

The magical instrument ascribed to the 16th Path is the 
Seat, Throne, or Altar, which are curiously feminine symbols 
for a kala associated with the Hierophant 5 until it is 
remembered that, in the New Aeon, the ‘Lord initiating’ (i.e. 
the hierophant) is the god Set, 6 who is identical with his 
Mother, Typhon, and therefore the continuation — as has 
been shown — of her kala, 15. She is in fact the Goddess 15, 
a name given to the Woman Fulfilled whose symbol, the full 
moon, occurred on the 15th day. The 16th kala was there¬ 
fore her child, i.e. Set,and Set-Typhon under a single image 
was typified by the Dog Star, Sothis. According to Wilkinson, 7 
Set-Typhon was known as ‘The Giant’ and this symbolism 
equates it with the pre-eval Nephilim. 3 

The name of the seat in Egyptian is Hes, or Isis. The 
throne bears the God, as the woman bears the child, as the 
altar bears the priest. The part of the body associated with 

4 In 777 Revised, page xxv. 

5 The title of the Tarot Trump attributed to the 16th Path. 

6 This vitally important fact was pointed out by Frater Achad. See Cults of 
the Shadow chapter 8, note 32. 

7 The Ancient Egyptians. 

8 See Part I, chapter 7, and elsewhere. 




Uriens 


188 Nightside of Eden 

the 16th kala is the shoulder, an euphemism for that which 
bears or supports the world, i.e. the Mother. Hence the asso¬ 
ciation with Atlas (Oriens) who bears the world on his 
shoulders. 

Uriens or Oriens, as the name implies, is also attributable 
to the Orient, the place of the rising sun or solar-phallic 
power. This phenomenon, both in its cosmic (celestial) and 
in its microcosmic (biological) aspect lies behind the name of 
the Ordo Templi Orientis, O.T.O, which being interpreted 
means the Order of the Temple of the Exalted or Risen 
Phallus. 

The verse of CCXXXI relating to this Path declares: 

Also is the Star of Flame (i.e. the Phallus) exalted, bringing bene¬ 
diction to the Universe. 

A glance at the columns of Liber 777 shows that Uriens is 
attributed to the eleventh kala which is ruled by air and 
whose tunnel is presided over by Satan, Prince of the Powers 
of the Air. 

The number corresponding to the astral dimension of this 
kala is 45, the number of ADM (Man). He is one of the 
entities accompanying Lilith in the spaces between the south 
and east cardinal points of the zodiacal qliphoth, at the 
centre of which is the ‘evil’ angel Samael. 9 Within the in¬ 
verted dimensions of these spaces stands the Throne of 
Samael. Before this stands the altar on which is stretched the 
nocturnal Lilith, Mother of Abortions. 10 The concept is 
explicit in the number of Uriens, for 395 is MShKLH 
Abortiens. Furthermore, the reflection of the Hierophant 
is refracted into the depths of the Abyss in the form of Set 
or Pan (Samael), the devil or double being the ‘opposite’ 
image. 11 Likewise, this concept is explicit in the number of 
Uriens, for 395 is MShNH, meaning ‘twofold’, ‘duplex’. It 
derives from the Egyptian shen, ‘two’, ‘twofold circle’, and 

9 The number of Samael is 131, which is the number of Pan and of Mako, 
the son of Typhon. 

10 Another reference to the NephUim ; see note 8 supra. 

11 Satan means the ‘opposer 1 . 


189 

‘the other’, the alter ego. Thus are the Heavens (HShMIM = 
395) reflected into the hells, and the Hierophant or Magus 
of the Eternal 11 becomes the Judge of the ‘dead’, 13 whose 
symbol is the jackal, the howler in the haunts of the dead, 
and ‘the eater of dung in the day of Be With Us’. 14 At the 
termination of this abominable repast the Adimiron (The 
Bloody) swarm across the desolate places of the void leaving 
the ‘rich brown juice’ 15 of annihilation in their wake. 

Other denizens of the cell of Uriens are the gorgons and 
minotaurs which are linked with the sun-son symbolic of 
Taurus and the Hierophant, and with the magical force that 
turns to stone. 16 The minotaur was the monstrous offspring 
of Pasiphae, daughter of the Sun, who copulated with a 
sacred bull. In The Magical Revival I have given Crowley’s 
description of the rite associated with the begetting of the 
Minotaur. When it was obtained it was imprisoned in a maze 
into which youths and maidens were introduced for sacri¬ 
ficial purposes. They strayed to the depths of the labyrinth 
and were devoured by the beast. The serpent-haired Gorgon 
is a form of Lilith; she is girdled with snakes and her glaring 
eyes turn to stone all who meet her gaze. 

Another animal associated with this path is the hippo¬ 
potamus, a primordial image of Typhon. In the African 
cultus the goddess Ife typifies the 16th kala and she is 
represented by the gaping vulva of Iyemoja, the source of the 
manifested universe borne upon the shoulders of Atlas 
(Orien/Uriens). The hippopotamus, or water-cow, is the great 
bearer in the waters, the equivalent of Taurus, the Bull of 
Earth, on dry land, hence the connection with the goddess 
(Venus rules Taurus) and the waters of the abyss. Iyemoja 
means literally ‘Mother of Fish’, which shows the specifically 
sexual nature of her function. 

12 An alternative title of the tarot trump known as The Hierophant. 

13 ShVPT, ‘judge’ = 359. 

14 See Liber Cheth vel Vallum Abiegni ( Magick , p. 494). In the present 
context, the excremental refuse of the abortions of Lilith. 

1 s This is the colour attributed to Path 16. 

16 The name Set means ‘a standing stone’; and Isis means literally ‘the Seat of 
Stone’. 




Zamradiel 


191 


7 


Zamradiel 


THE 17th Path transmits the influence of 
the Lovers. Its tunnel is sentinelled by 
Zamradiel who is evoked by vibrating his 
name in the key of ‘D\ The sound should 
be accompanied by a hoarse cachinnation. 
His sigil should be painted in a tint approxi¬ 
mating new leather yellow upon a vesica of mauve. 

His number is 292, that of TzRB, ‘the raven’, the black 
bird of Set. TzRB also means ‘evening’; at sunset the raven 
commences its predatory flight. BTzR, a metathesis of TzRB, 
signifies ‘gold’, the metal associated with the twins Set-Horus, 
Set’s totem being the black bird and that of Horns the golden 
falcon. The earlier twins, however, were Set and Anubis, the 
golden jackal who, with his dark shade, haunted the desert of 
mummies, i.e. the astral shells left by those who had made 
the crossing and transcended the abyss. 

The sigil of Zamradiel is composed of a lunar crescent 
pierced by an arrow shot from a bow, both ends of which 
terminate in the letter G. The transfixed moon is the cruci¬ 
fied flesh. The ‘crucified’ are those who have made the 
crossing of the Abyss. The letter G ( gimel ) signifies the 
‘camel’, the ship of the desert, the vehicle by which the 
crossing is achieved. It is the letter of the High Priestess. 

This tunnel concentrates the influence of Set via the Black 


power-zone (Binah) that receives its light from the Stellar 
Sphere (Chokmah) and rays it downward through the abyss. 
The 17th kala is thus strongly charged with the atmos¬ 
phere of Daath and of Death, both of which have close 
affinity with the Lovers. 

The number 292 is also that of Chozzar which, as suggested 
in Cults of the Shadow , is probably connected with the name 
Choronzon, a corrupt form of it. The symbol of Chozzar 
resembles the astrological sign of Neptune and according to 
Blavatsky ( Secret Doctrine , H, 356) Chozzar is called 
Neptune by the uninitiated. It is the symbol of Atlantean 
Magic and its attribution to the second power-zone, 
Chokmah, is highly significant because Chokmah receives an 
influx direct from Pluto (Kether). 

Michael Bertiaux observes that ‘Pluto being correlated to 
Neptune is pure sexuality’ which in the Plutonic Sphere ‘is 
psychic and magical. This energy, which is called “libido” is 
the most powerful force in the world and cannot be isolated 
with magical methods ... It is also the foundation of the 
various natural fields of force, such as light, gravitation, 
electro-magnetism, and it is a fact that the basic sub-atomic 
particle, being a functional photon, is in reality libido in an 
elementary form’. 1 

This is the energy that powers the Lovers of the 17th Path, 
but, in the tunnel beneath it, it has been transformed into the 
RPVAH 2 or ‘drug of death’ that is represented by the black 
bird of Set and the black pig of Typhon. Chozzar means ‘a 
pig’. This creature was adopted as a symbol of the Great 
Work by the Typhonians because it was the only animal 
known to devour human excrement. The pig is symbolic and 
so is the excrement, for it is not anal refuse that is veiled by 
this totem, but the blood of the moon, the human female flux 
in its dark phase. The symbolism was carried over into the 

'See Michael Bertiaux 2nd. Year Grade Papers of the Monastery of the 
Seven Rays. See also Cults of the Shadow chapter 11. 

2 RPVAH = 292, means ‘a drug’. APRVH, also 292, and a metathesis of 
RPVAH, means ‘a young bird’. 




192 Nightside of Eden 

solar cults of later ages, and at the time of the vernal equinox 
the god Khunsu is depicted in the orb of the full moon 
bearing in his arms the sacrificial pig. 3 The imbibition of the 
black wine of the moon prepared the initiate for the dis¬ 
integration, or crucifixion, at Easter time, and this made 
possible the crossing over into the world of spirit or Non- 
being. 

The Gnostics depicted Chozzar in the form of a Serpent 
whose stellar representative was Draco. The undulation of the 
serpent was an image of the periodic feminine flow. 

The mystery of this tunnel is glyphed by the sigil of its 
sentinel with the lunar crescent transfixed by the arrow. As 
Massey has shown, ‘the first bow was drawn by the Genetrix’ 
and it ‘came full circle in the cycle of Gestation, hence the 
bow of Neith, and the arrow of the Goddess Seti\ 

In Zamradiel’s sigil the moon is young and has not yet 
attained the fulness of gestation which occurs after the lovers 
have emerged from the City of the Pyramids (Binah) into the 
desert of Set. 

The relevant verse from CCXXXI reads: 

Here then beneath the winged Eros is youth, delighting in the one 

and the other. He is Asar [Osiris] between Asi [Isis] and Nephthi 

[Nephthys]. 

Osiris is the mummy, the dead one who is reborn in the spirit 
world, having been conceived by Isis and brought to birth 
by Nephthys. 

The magical siddhi of this kala is — understandably — 
bilocation, here symbolized by the mummy (Osiris) and the 
risen youth (Asi). This dual deity sometimes appears as The 
Brothers and sometimes as The Lovers. 

It is from this tunnel that dark forces emerge and seep 
from the abysses of non-being, permeating the power-zones 
of manifestation with the shadows of their absence. This 
doubling or dappling with light and shade is typified by 
symbolic hybrids such as the magpie, the penguin, the pie¬ 
bald, the parrot, the zebra; in fact, all dappled and chameleon- 

3 See the planisphere of Denderah. 


Zamradiel 193 

like creatures that have the apparent power of transfor¬ 
mation. 

The Order of Qliphoth ascribed to this realm is the Tzalali- 
miron, ‘The Changers’. The supreme totem of this tunnel is 
the hyena and this realm is haunted by votaries of the Bultu, 
or Spectral Hyena. Its cult is known to have existed in the 
paleolithic age. It brought its totem out of Africa and spread 
it secretly, all over the earth. 4 It had its astral source in the 
tunnel beneath the Path of the Twins (The Lovers) and was 
reflected on to the earth plane at a place in Africa named 
KabultUoa. The name means literally ‘the shadow (Ka) of the 
spectre or spirit (loa) of the hyena (bultu)' . The magical 
vibration of the Cult was concentrated in the mantram 
‘Bultungin’, a verb meaning ‘I transform myself into a hyena’. 
This was the atavism assumed by the spectral shape that 
formed itself of the elements of the 17th kala, when the twin 
powers of Love and Death s were fused into one image. Its 
qliphotic reflex was sucked out of space in the form of this 
creature by an Adept who ‘knew the sacred alignments’ 6 and 
who vibrated the mantram that evoked it. This was achieved 
by fusing the twin serpents, Ob and Od, within the body of 
a priestess dedicated to the dark god of this kala whose name 
is now lost. 

This Cult of the Spectral Hyena persisted when all other 
forms of its god had perished, and certain magicians and 
dreamers have received intimations of its existence 
through the centuries. Dr. John Dee (1527-1608), who first 
called it down from the spaces of Daath in historic times, 
named it Choronzon. Aleister Crowley, who contacted it in 
our own times, also called it Choronzon, while H. P. Love- 
craft sensed it as the monstrous and amorphous slime known 
as Yog-Sothoth. 7 

According to a secret grimoire ‘the Beast was called down 

4 Remains of hyena and various cult objects found in Tir Iarll (modern 
Glamorgan) suggest that the Cult spread even to Britain. 

5 Eros = Libido, and Daath = Death. 

6 The phrase is Austin Spare's. 

7 An amalgam of the god-names Set and Thoth. 


194 Nightside of Eden 

not from known spaces but from cells between them, s while 
the bultu drums beat off-beat rhythms.’ Similarly, in the later 
Petro rites of Voodoo — in which the Cult survived under 
another name — ‘the alignments of the secret vevers flowed 
between the cardinal points, not through them. An entity 
appeared in answer to the Call and crystallized about itself 
the spectral anatomy peculiar to the Bultu totem. It presided 
at a Sabbat within the tunnels of the earth, and then it 
vanished. Nor did the Beast appear again, even during the 
dark dynasties of Khem when traffic with non-human entities 
was secretly undertaken in the Cults of Taurt and Set. 

‘Having concentrated the essence of the Bultu within its 
eidolon, or spectre, it secreted a subtle sperm that combined 
with the life-blood of its consort to produce a magnetic 
salve, thus sealing the fire of the woman with that of the 
Beast in a single substance. 

‘The “times being right” and the “space marks” being 
established, a violent magical storm raged in the region of 
Kabultiloa where this monstrous rite was enacted. Ceaseless 
rains are said to have fallen in places that were rarely rained 
upon, and violent electrical disturbances in the atmosphere 
obliterated all traces of the event. During the deluge constant 
lightnings flashed and, penetrating to the caverns beneath the 
earth, struck the bride of the Beast as she writhed in its 
embrace. Her body was instantly burnt to a cinder and a 
small black stone slipped from her thighs. The two vital oils, 
fused at incredible heat, produced a talisman of incalculable 
power. The fire that blent the twin serpents of life, the 
bestial and the divine, 8 9 set its seal upon the stone in the 
shape of a curious device not unlike the sigil of Zamradiel 
and a certain secret symbol known to have been used in the 
times of Atlantis in connection with the worship of Chozzar’. 10 

This mystical keraunograph thereafter became the sigil of 

8 i.e. the Cells of the Qliphoth. 

9 The woman was a priestess of Choronzon. 

1 °It has been suggested (page 9) that Chozzar was the original form of the 

name Choronzon. 


Zamradiel 195 

the Bultu, the seal adopted by the Cult through succeeding 
aeons, and it is said to exist at the present time in a secret 
sanctuary of Voodoo known as Ville-aux-champs. 11 

The tunnel of Zamradiel is under the aegis of the forces 
of Shugal-Choronzon in their voodoo forms of Baron 
Samedhi and Guede-Nibho. The Baron represents the Satur¬ 
nine 1 2 aspect. Another of his names is Cimitiere, the place of 
the dead or of those who make the crossing into non-being. 
Hence, Baron Samedhi is also known as Maitre Carrefour or 
Carfax, Master of the Crossroads, for at the junction of the 
four ways 13 the spirits of the living cross over into the realm 
of non-being, and vice versa. 1 * Guede, on the other hand, 
concentrates the Eros-Libido element of the current rep¬ 
resented by The Lovers. Their stellar vehicle is Gemini, their 
planetary seat, Mercury, the god who guides the dead in the 
underworld in the form of Shugal, whether as fox, dog, 
jackal or wolf, according to the appropriate local faunal 
types. 

Guede Nibho represents the dual polarities Ob and Od in 
the forms of the life-giving Odic force, and the Obeah or 
Ophidian current manifest through death and typified by 
the abhorrent Ganin-Gub. 15 Guede approximates to the 
Egyptian Khonsu who is associated with the black pig or boar 
of Set, as previously mentioned. The name Nibho, meaning 
‘lord’, derives from the Egyptian Neb (our Nib or Nob). 
Lord Guede is ascribed to the Northern quarter which, in 
the present context, is above Saturn and the stellar sphere 16 
in the place of Daath, buried deeply in the desert gulfs 
inhabited by the jackal of Set and the pig of Khonsu. 

11 Seat of the Order of the Shadow, and cite of the true Shamballah. See 
Bertiaux, Grade Papers, MSR. 

12 Saturn is ascribed to Binah. 

13 The centre of the cross represents the intersection of the plane of being by 
that other dimension we can only name non-being. 

•^According to Plutarch (Of Isis and Osiris, ch. 49) among the meanings of 
the name Set-Typhon are ‘turning back’ and ‘overpassing’ (Le. passing or crossing 

1 s See The Natural Genesis (Vol. 1, p. 300). 

16 Binah and Chokmah respectively. 



196 Nightside of Eden 

The Bultu is neither human nor animal but an astral mani¬ 
festation that feeds like a vampire upon the essential oils of its 
victims. As the spectral hyena it fascinates by its glance and 
then slakes its lust for blood. As the Ganin-Gub, 17 or Serpent 
of Ob, it drinks the actual plasma of its victim’s vitality, 
mingled with the menstruum of the preistess who has drained 
it into her chalice. 18 Similarly, Baron Samedhi draws sus¬ 
tenance from his victims in many forms, thus perpetuating a 
lingering half-life in dimensions outside the range of normal 
consciousness, but accessible to those who ‘know the sacred 
alignments’ and who know how to vivify the sigil of the 
Bultu, the sound of whose mantram can open the Pylons of 
Shugal. 

The dual nature of the symbolism associated with 
Zamradiel accords with the nature of the Bultu which, being 
of another dimension, is neither flesh nor spectre, white nor 
black, human nor beast, but a combination of hybrid entities 
far surpassing in horror those described by the ancients as 
the products of unnatural congress. In the off-beat rhythm of 
the Bultu drums the sensitive ear may detect the mantram 
of ultimate abomination, the hideous symbol of which 
resembles the hyena fabled to have sprung from the union of 
the ravening desert jackal and the lioness of Ethiopia. 

The hyena is symbolic of all half lives, all twilight and 
crepuscular states of consciousness, all crossed breeds inter¬ 
weaving, coiling, worming their ambiguous images into flesh 
and branding with the mark of the Bultu the myriad forms it 
chooses as its vehicles. Primordial atavisms are unsealed by 
the beat of the Bultu drums and, if used in connection with 
the tunnel of Zamradiel, 19 in the key of ‘D\ will snare the 
mind in the dark web of its rhythms. Whether heard from 
near or far, those that hear it are compelled to attend the 
Sabbath over which Choronzon presides. 

This accounts, in a phenomenal sense, for the ‘ominous 


Zamradiel 197 

appearances’ and ‘banshees’, the legendary beings ascribed to 
this path in Liber 777. 

In the earliest African myths, Oro, the tempest, has affini¬ 
ties with the 17th kala. On his feast day he appears in the 
shape of a ‘monster in human form’ with face and lips 
smeared with blood. He bellows and screams like a fierce 
wind; the priests celebrate his mass in sacred groves where, 
concealed from the eyes of the unintiated, they simulate his 
banshee-howlings by the rapid twirling of a wooden clapper 
attached to a string. 20 

In the Voodoo system the Marassas, or Twins, are 
symbolized by a vever which incorporates the three pillars 
of the Tree of Life. In Cults of the Shadow I have reproduced 
an illustration of this vever by Michael Bertiaux who has 
added ‘the crossed baton of the magical Saturn, or Guede 
Nibho, so as to produce the model for the pathways of the 
voltigeurs, as well as pathways for the secret schools of 
Voudou initiation’. 21 This is of vital importance for it 
demonstrates the points at which the leapers behind the Tree 
traverse the guilfs of space without using the tunnels of Set, 
thus jumping the interstices as they leave one dimension and 
enter another. 

The special colour of this path is reddish grey inclined to 
mauve. Grey tinged with red suggests the Sphere of the 
Stars 22 suffused with the blood of Isis (Kali/Mars); the 
inclination to mauve or lavender shows the movement of the 
feminine stellar current in the direction of Daath. According 
to Crowley, lavender is attributed to Daath. 

20 The primitive bull-roarer that appeared later, in Egypt, as the sistrum in 
the Mysteries of Isis. 

21 Cults, page 171. 

2 2 Chokmah, the cosmic power-zone of the Magus associated with Neptune. 


17 One of its later forms, when the Cult had reached its Voodoo phase. 
18 i.e. the vulva. 

19 ie. after Zamradiel has been invoked. 


Characith 


199 


8 


Characith 


^ THE 18th Path is under the aegis of 
Cancer. Its tunnel is sentinelled by Chara¬ 
cith whose number is 640. Cancer is the 
astro-glyph of the Holy Graal and 640 is 
the number of KVS ThNChVMIM, the 
Cup of Consolation; and that which 
consoles the Adept on the Path of Cheth is the Graal of Our 
Lady. Such is the nature of this Chalice which yields both 
ecstasy and magical immortality that its kalas are highly 
addictive. Should the Adept linger over long in this tunnel 
the addiction becomes obsessive and he runs the risk of 
becoming a vampire, draining cup after cup of the hellbroth 
distilled by the Great Harlot, the Mother of Abominations, 
who yields eagerly to the dark desires of those who are drunk 
on the wine of her fornications. 

The magical formula of this kala is cunnilinctus which, if 
it exceeds the proper limits leads not only to the death 1 of 
the partner but also of the magician himself. The Order of 
Qliphoth inhabiting the tunnel of Characith is therefore 
known as the Shichiririon, ‘the Black’. 

In the Arcana of Thoth the letter cheth (8) is ascribed to 
path 18 and it is significant that the positive reflection of 
the negative qliphoth assumes the form of Krishna the 

1 By depletion. 


Charioteer. 2 Apollo the Charioteer is also attributed to this 
path, and the ‘Lord of the Triumph of Light’ (a title of this 
Atu) is reflected into the tunnel as the Black Sun of Tiphereth, 
the Child of the Waters of the Abyss that swirl in the Graal 
of Babalon. 

When the sun reddens or sets he is said to be drinking the 
blood of the goddess or ‘performing the higher form of 
cunnilinctus’, an expression used in a certain secret comment 
on the Kaula rite of the Vama Marg. 3 

The number of Characith, 640, is also that of ShMSh, the 
Sphere of the Sun, which equates with MMSK (640), meaning 
‘a drink offering’, and ThMR the ‘palm of the hand’ and a 
‘palm tree’. The dates of the palm tree are connected with 
the phenomena of menstruation. 4 

The sigil of Characith should be painted in dark greenish 
brown on an amber-hued circle. It shows a downward facing 
mummy overshadowed by a camel-headed entity that issues 
from its feet. This image is as it were concealed in the name 
Characith, for 640 is the number of MPLTzTh, a ‘horrible 
idol’ (simulacrum horrendum ). The camel is the ship of the 
desert. Its symbolism has been explained in connection with 
the 13th tunnel which crosses the abyss via the path of the 
Priestess of the Silver Star. The camel is also attributed to 
the 18th path where it functions as a beast of burden. The 
crab, turtle, and whale, are also included because this path is 
under the aegis of Cancer, a watery influence that rep¬ 
resents the most vital element in astro-magical workings. 

The stddhis associated with this kala are Bewitchments and 
the Power of Casting Enchantments. 

The name of Characith should be vibrated in the key of ‘D’ 
sharp accompanied by the plashings peculiar to magical 
fountains or waterfalls. 

The Cup and the Furnace are the appropriate magical 

2 ‘Krishna’ means literally the Black One. 

3 See the Typhonian Trilogy. 

4 See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 2. 



200 


Nightside of Eden 


weapons, and in the symbolism of the vegetable kingdom the 
watercress is attributed to this kala because the combination 
of heat and moisture, fire and water, typifies the contents of 
the Cup that contains the fiery dew of the goddess. 

The appropriate verse from Liber CCXXXI declares: 

He rideth upon the chariot of eternity; the white and the black 

are harnessed to his car. Therefore he reflecteth the Fool and the 

sevenfold veil is reveiled. 

This implies the orderly ruling of diverse forces. The white 
and the black are the two suns of the upper and lower 
horizon, or the height and the depth, the infernal Furnace of 
Amenta and the supernal Sun of the frontal Tree (Tiphereth). 
The solar force (Heru-Ra-Ha) is here implied, for the white 
and the black are Ra-Hoor-Khuit and Hoor-Paar-Kraat and 
it is not by chance that the initials of these gods total 640, 
the number of Characith. s The sevenfold veil is that of the 
Goddess of the Seven Stars who is diaphanous in her 
luminosity. ‘He’ 6 reflects the Fool, that is the Hidden Light 
that is ‘A’ between I and O (Isis and Osiris). ‘A’ is Apophis, 
the God Set in his Ophidian form. He is the Light that 
imbues the graal of the goddess drained by the Adept. 

The Magical Formula of the 18th kala is Abrahadabra, 
the ‘key of the rituals’ mentioned in AL. 1 These rituals 
include that of the eighth degree O.T.O. which unlocks both 
this path and the 13th path, the tunnel of which is unsealed 
by the rite of the XI 0 . 8 Had is the heart of Abracadabra, as 
Apophis is the heart of IAO, the Heart Girt with the Serpent 
(Set) that pulses with the ophidian vibrations swirling in the 
Cup of Babalon. The VIIT has thus a positive link with the 
XI° the lunar current. This is balanced by the IX° which is 
the key to Path 19. 9 

The African god Loco is a denizen of the tunnel of 

S HRH + RHK + HPK = 640. 

6 i.e. Asar (Osiris), the ‘dead’. 

7 L 20. 

8 See remarks on page 205 infra. 

9 See remarks concerning the relation between tunnels and the formulae of 
sexual magick, infra, p. 205. 


Characith 


201 


Characith. He is a god of forests who, together with Elere, 
Ojehun and Abiku, evil spirits of jungle and desert, contrives 
to enter the wombs of women in order to be bom into the 
human life-wave. 


9 




TUNNEL 19 is sentinelled by the demon 
Temphioth whose number is 610. His sigil 
should be etched in a sharp greenish yel¬ 
low hue upon a grey arrow-shaped ground. 
The predominant influence is that of the 


lion-serpent, Teth, a glyph of the spermatozoon, which is 


shown in the sigil in the shape of four vesicas depending from 


a serpentine form attached to a beast’s head. 


The number 610 is that of AThRVG, meaning ‘lust’ and 
‘desire’. This is in accord with the Tarot Trump entitled Lust 
relevant to the Path above this tunnel. The trump shows a 
woman mounted upon a leonine beast with seven heads: 
‘The head of an Angel: the head of a Saint: the head of a 
Poet: the head of an Adulterous Woman: the head of a Man 


of Valour: the head of a Satyr: and the head of a Lion- 
Serpent’. 1 


Another form of 610 is ChBRTh which means ‘coupling 
point’, ‘place of junction’, and it is in the tunnel of Temphioth 
that the magical coupling of the woman and the beast occurs. 
This is confirmed by the image of KPhRTh (610), the ‘mercy 
seat’, and ‘place of the two cherubs’, originally known as the 


1 See the description of Atu XI in The Book of Thoth (Crowley). 


Temphioth 203 

place or house of the two beetles, such being the sign of 
Khepra. 2 

On the 19th path the lioness Sekhet is the vehicle of the 
force of Leo, which she represents as the torrid summer sun 
at its zenith, this being typical of sexual heat. 

Liber CCXXXI declares: 

Also came forth mother Earth [Isis] with her lion, even Sekhet, 

the lady of Asi. 

This means that Sekhet is the sexual heat of Isis, the force 
that overcomes ‘evil’. It is shown by her bridling the Beast 
whereon she rides. 

The magical siddhi pertaining to this path is that of Train¬ 
ing Wild Beasts, which is a direct reference to the mechanism 
of the IX° O.T.O., but with the woman dominant, bridling 
and directing the insensate passions. The magical formula of 
this kala is thus Io Mega Therion (the Great Wild Beast). 
In the tunnel of Temphioth this formula is reflected as 
unbridled lust symbolised by the Black Cat of the Sabbatic 
Mysteries. 

The name of Temphioth should be vibrated in the key of 
‘E’ with a roaring, hissing explosive force behind it. This is 
the root vibration ( bija mantra) of the female. 

Whereas the 19th path is the place of the lion, the tunnel 
thereof is that of the serpent. The serpents that writhe in 
the cauldron of the witches at the sabbath of Set are depicted 
in Frieda Harris’s design of the Atu entitled Lust. 3 Its number 
is 11, the number of magick or ‘energy tending to change’. 

In the African and Voodoo systems this is the place of the 
serpent deities, Dangbe, Idagba, and the python-god 
Selwanga. Dangbe or Damballah is consecrated to Aidowedo, 
the goddess of the rainbow. Her symbolism has been ex¬ 
plained particularly in Cults of the Shadow, ch. 2. It is 
connected with the lunar phase of the female and indicates 
the shadow-side of the IX° in contrast to the ‘coupling in 

2 Later applied to the constellation of the Crab (Cancer) which denotes the 
summer solstice and the time of the deluge. The Akkadian Su Kul-na — ‘the seizer 
of seed’ was attributed to the month ruled by Cancer. 

3 See The Book of Thoth, Atu XI. 





204 Nightside of Eden 

the dry season’ indicated by the same formula applied to 
the path of this 19th kala. It is, in effect, the IX° enacted 
during the deluge of which the rainbow is the glyph. 

The phenomenon of lightning, symbolic of the serpent’s 
flickering tongue also pertains to the tunnel of Temphioth, 
and the sudden spasm of orgasm that it represents is the 
mudra or ‘magical gesture’ of the Cult of the Spermatozoon. 
A stroke (syncope) is the typical disease of this path. 

The Order of Qliphoth ascribed to this tunnel is the 
Shalchbiron or The Flaming; the flames that lick the cauldron 
of the Sabbath in which the lion-serpents are seethed. 

The supreme symbol of the tunnel is the goddess Qatesh 
who is seen in vision (by its Adepts) as a radiantly beautiful, 
naked, woman mounted upon a lion. In her right hand she 
holds flowers, in her left a serpent. A full moon resting in a 
crescent is the form of her head-dress. These symbols indicate 
the lunar current in its active phase. The occult use of the 
serpent’s tongue was well known to the ancients and is still 
applied 4 to the genitals of the priestess to induce trance. 

Research on the Paths of the Tree and in the corresponding 
tunnels of Set has enabled the present writer to establish an 
exact system of sexo-magical references pertaining to the 
Ophidian Current as expounded in the Sovereign Sanctuary 
of the Gnosis of the O.T.O. It is, at this juncture, necessary 
to explain these procedures in some detail. 

The Sovereign Sanctuary contains three active degrees, 
viz. the VIII 0 , the IX°, and the XI°. S Of these three active 
degrees, the VIH° has three divisions, the IX° has two divi¬ 
sions, and the XT’ has one division. These are main divisions. 
There are also several sub-divisions, depending upon the skill 
and/or the preferences of the pracititioners involved. 

Broadly speaking, the VIlF is of a masturbatory nature, 
the IX° involves coitus proper, and the XI° comports the use 
of the lunar current. The following tables will clarify the 

4 In the secret Temples of Voodoo. 

5 The X° is of an administrative nature and its esoteric aspect does not concern 
the present study. The reader is however referred to Cults of the Shadow, p. 1S8 
for an esoteric explanation of the X°. 


Temphioth 


205 


nature of these three degrees and their six major divisions: 


vnr 

Priest (Solitary): For rites involving Consecration. 15th kala. 

Priestess (Solitary): For rites involving Consecration. 

(For the consecration of actual talis¬ 
mans and for materialising new part¬ 
ners — by attraction — as opposed to the 
(VIII 0- ) consecration of ideas and/or projects, the 

lunar current is employed. Such Workings 
are performed with the 13th and 18th 
kalas). 

VIII 0 of Priestess by Priest: 

via tongue for Induction of Trance. Vision. 
(VIII 0 2 ) via hand for Induction of Ecstasy. Oracles. 


VIII° of Priest by Priestess: 

via mouth for her magical nourishment 
and renewed sexual vigour. 16th kala. 
via hand for rendering her own body an 
(VIII 02 ) engine of sex-magical glamour and attrac¬ 

tion. 14 th kala. 


VIII 0 * 

Priest (Solitary): with were-masks for operations of lycan- 
terrestrial thropy etc., performed with the 27th kala 
Beasts). in the Tunnel of Parfaxitas. Atavisms. 

VIII° 

Priestess (Solitary): with mer-masks for operations of be¬ 
witchment and the casting of illusions etc., 
(Oceanic performed with the 29th kala in the 

Sorcery) Tunnel of Qulielfi. Atavisms. 

IXOPERATIONS OF THE SUN, RA and KHEP-RA 
(Supernal & Infernal). 

Priest and Priestess (IX 0 *, Supernal): Natural Congress for 
Works of Creation, Intuition and Inspira¬ 
tion. Performed with the 19th kala in 
the Tunnel of Temphioth. Day. 



206 Nightside of Eden 

Priest and Priestess (IX°\ Infernal): Unnatural Congress for 
Works of Zombeism, Death-Posture, 
Dream Control. Night. Performed with 
the 24th kala in the Tunnel of Niantiel. 
XI° OPERATIONS OF THE MOON. 

Priestess and Priest: During eclipse of the moon for Works of 
materialization and reification. Performed 
with the 26th kala in the Tunnel of 
A’ano’nin. 

It will be observed that ten kalas are employed for these 
major sex-magical Workings in the Tunnels of Set: the 13th., 
14th., 16th., and 18th., for Works involving the Chalice; the 
19th., for Works involving the Sun in the Heavens (Ra); the 
24th., for Works involving the Sun in Amenta (Khep-Ra); the 
26th for Works involving the lunar current such as materiali¬ 
sation of objects, reification of dreams etc.; the 27th for 
Works involving atavistic resurgence on dry land (male); the 
29th., for Works involving atavistic resurgence via oceanic 
sorcery (female). 

It will also be observed that, broadly speaking, these 
Workings may be divided into Works of Consecration (VIII 0 '); 
Works of Inspiration (IX° + ); Works of Desecration (IX°"); 
and Works of Reification (XI°). 

To the particular kala under consideration here (i.e. the 
19th) is ascribed the sex magick of the IX° + , hence the 
magical formula of Path 19 is Io Mega Therion, the Great 
Wild Beast. That of the previous kala, the 18th., to which is 
ascribed the VIII 0 , is Abrahadabra, the formula of the Great 
Work and of the Holy Graal. The 18th kala, the Cult of the 
Cup, is thus balanced by the 19th kala, the Cult of the 
Spermatozoon. 6 

6 It is interesting to note that the word ZOON (197) means ‘Beast’. See 
Equinox, L x., p. 55. 


10 


Yamatu 


^ THE 20th Tunnel is under the aegis of 

Yamatu whose name should be intoned in 
the key of ‘F’, in lower register and with 
sighing or murmuring undertones. His 
sigil should be painted in yellowish green on a sliver of (grey) 
slate. His number, 131, is the number of Samael, a name of 
Satan or Set as Guardian of the Threshold. It is also the 
number of Pan and of Baphomet, the idol adored of the 
Templars. MKVNIH, meaning ‘her foundation or fundament’, 
a symbol of the kteis, also adds to 131. 

Note that 131 + 535 (the number of kteis) = 666, the 
number of the Beast. This is confirmed by the fact that 
MAKO, the son 1 of Typhon, also adds up to 131. 

The sigil of Yamatu is a secret cypher of Set. It exhibits 
the inverted cross which signifies the downward passage or 
crossing into Amenta. 

The astro-glyph of the 20th Path is Virgo, and its threshold 
is the kteis of the Virgin guarded by Samael. Its magical 
formula is that of ‘virile force reserved’ 2 i.e. Karezza, which 
comports a build-up of sexual energy for magical purposes 
but without final release. This is a perfectly legitimate magical 
formula and one which may be used in connection with the 

1 i.e. Set. 

2 See Liber 777. 







208 Nightside of Eden 

formula described in connection with the previous kala. It is 
also a formula of the Black Brothers and was used by a 
curious cult having its headquarters at Harvard (New England) 
in the 18th century. Andrew Rothovius writes 3 of this Cult: 
Led by Shadrach Ireland, who had come from Charlestown with the 
woman he called his ‘soul mate’, Abigail Lougeem it was a reaction 
to the aridities of the prevailing Calvinism, but with overtones 
suggesting that it drew on some survivals of the witch-cult that had 
gone underground after Salem, a century previously. Calling itself 
the ‘Brethren of the New Light’, it advocated celibacy, mutual con¬ 
fession of sins, and a withdrawal from the ‘people of the world’, 
who were soon to be done away with anyway, by the ‘powers from 
outside’. The ‘elect’, however, — i.e. the members of the cult — 
would then attain bodily immortality in the flesh. Those who died 
before, needed to have their bodies preserved on platforms of 
stone , from whence they would arise, living and breathing, when 
the hour struck. 

Immortality in the flesh is one of the aims of the Black 
Brothers. The idea arose not only from the natural urge to 
protect the ego from the impact of death, with its conse¬ 
quent disruption of conscious identity, but also from a mis¬ 
interpretation of the doctrine of the Death Posture exem¬ 
plified by the Cult of the Mummy in ancient Khem. In this 
connection, Michael Bertiaux — writing on Astral Machines — 
refers to magicians who endeavoured to achieve immotality on 
the astral plane. He observes: 

Instruments like this 5 insulate against the changes of time, and it has 
been known that such instruments have been used by occultists to 
preserve themselves, or hold themselves on the astral plane against 
the onward tide of evolution . 6 

The Theosophist Leadbeater deplored this practice as a 
form of black magic. It is, in fact, a typical example of the 

3 Andrew Rothovius in an article entitled ‘Lovecraft and the New England 
Megaliths’, published in The Dark Brotherhood, Arkham House, Wisconsin, 1966. 

4 The platforms of stone (the italics are by Rothovius) may have been suggested 
by the name of Set, one of its meanings being a ‘standing stone’. The Stone Seat is 
a symbol of Isis, originally Typhon, the Mother of Mako (ie. Set). This accords 
with the gematric equivalent of 131, MKVNIH, meaning‘her seat, or foundation’. 

5 Bertiaux is referring to a machine which he calls ‘the Astral Condenser*. 

6 Grade Papers of the Monastery of the Seven Rays (Third Year’s Course), by 
Michael Bertiaux. 


Yamatu 209 

magic favoured by occultists who habitually haunt the 
Tunnel of Yamatu. 

Narcissus, the flower ascribed to this tunnel, yields a key 
to the nature of the formula of sexual magick associated with 
it, which, in its dark aspect reflects Karezza as a sterile 
spending of magical force. 7 This is confirmed by the letter 
Yod being regarded as sacred to Yamatu. Yod means a ‘hand’ 
and to this tunnel qabalists ascribe the Order of Qliphoth 
known as the Tzaphiriron, meaning ‘The Scratches’. 

The Light, or secret seed, concealed within the body sug¬ 
gests the idea of invisibility and this is the magical siddhi 
attributed to this ray, as also is parthenogenesis. 8 The work 
of the Black Brothers thus belongs naturally in the Tunnel 
of Yamatu where the seed, spilt in a sterile act, renders the 
body bereft of light and therefore ‘invisible’. It was the 
object of the New Light Sect to retain the light within, thus 
defying death and achieving immortality in the flesh. 

The deity ascribed to this ray is Hoor-paar-Kraat, the 
Egyptian original of the Greek god of Silence and Strength, 9 
Harpocrates. He was frequently depicted on the monuments 
as a child squatting upon a lotus with thumb or forefinger 
(both emblems of the phallus) pressed against its lips in the 
mudra of ‘not uttering a word’. 10 

The relevant verse in Liber CCXXXI repeats the above 
ideas: 

Also the Priest veiled himself, lest his glory be profaned, lest his 

word be lost in the multitude . 11 

The Tarot Trump attributed to this ray is that of the 
Hermit who carries the lamp and staff symbolic of the hidden 
light, or the light expressed in darkness. He is the Magus of 
the Voice of Power, but in his qliphotic reflex he becomes 
the utterer of the Word of Death imprisoned in the corpse 

7 i.e. via the Vni°*. 

*Cf. the Virgo-Virgin symbolism. 

9 i.e. latent sexuality. 

10 See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 8, for a full explanation of this phrase. 

11 Italics by present author. 





210 Nightside of Eden 

and not permitted to realize its identity with Space (cosmic 
consciousness). 

To be trapped in this tunnel is to suffer the death in life 
of petrification. The typical disease is paralysis, and the 
inclusion of ‘all anaphrodisiacs’ among the list of Vegetable 
Drugs ascribed to this ray again suggests the anti-vital nature 
of its sterilizing influences. 


11 


Kurgasiax 


13 C.l THE 21st Kala is dominated by Jupiter and is 
W refracted into a Tunnel sentinelled by Kurga- 
j siax whose name should be intoned imperiously 
/Tv in the key of ‘A’ sharp. His sigil should be 
X ji ) painted in rich purple on a bright blue ground 
rayed with yellow. 

The number of Kurgasiax is 315 which is that of IShH, ‘to 
stand’, ‘stand out’, ‘stand up’. It is derived from the Egyptian 
As, which indicates the ‘secreting part of the body’; also 
ash, ‘emission’, and asut, ‘the testicles’. 


The sigil of Kurgasiax shows a homed (or crescented) 
sphere containing an equal armed cross mounted on a pole 
terminating in three caudiform appendages. The cross within 
the circle is the Mark of Set which denotes the place of the 
crossing indicated by the northern pole or axis, i.e. Daath, the 
Gateway of the Abyss. The triple tail suggests three modes of 
entry via the backward or caudal tunnels that connect Daath 
hindwardly with the power-zones of Pluto, Jupiter, and 
Venus. These modes are glossed by the number 315 which is 
also that of OMRH, ‘Gomorrah’, a secret formula of Pluto; 


IShH, ‘the phallus’; and IQRH, meaning ‘her precious thing’ 
(i.e. vulva), for Pluto, Jupiter, and Venus respectively. The 
homed circle containing the equal armed cross is the homed 
barb of Set (spermatozoon) generated by the formula 315. 





212 


Nightside of Eden 

This is borne out by the title of the Tarotic key of this Path 
21, viz: The Lord of the Forces of Life, which, translated in 
terms of the Tunnel of Kurgasiax becomes The Lady of the 
Forces of Death; she who sends the incubus and the night¬ 
mare. 

In the verse of CCXXXI relevant to this kala, Jupiter 
appears as the Father whose reflection is the Mother: 

Now then the Father of all issued as a mighty Wheel; the Sphinx, 

and the dog-headed god, and Typhon, were bound on his circum¬ 
ference. 

The Wheel is the sphere containing the Mark of the Beast 
which is a revolving chakra that activates the forces of the 
Sphinx , 1 the dog-headed god , 2 and Typhon , 3 repeating the 
formula above described. In the Tarot, the wheel becomes 
the Wheel of the Goddess Fortuna who determines the 
fluctuation of earthly life. 

The magical siddhi associated with this kala is Ascendancy, 
political or otherwise. Hence the ascription to this Ray of the 
Sceptre as its typical magical weapon. 

It is noteworthy that Crowley regarded the formula of 
Gomorrah , 4 which is the key formula of the Tunnel of 
Kurgasiax, as the feminine version of the formula of Sodom 
that obtains on the other side of the Tree at this level . 5 

1 Male-female potencies. 

3 Pluto. 

3 The Mother. 

4 The equivalent of the K°~in the reorganized O.T.O. 

s See Crowley’s notes on the Yi King (Hexagram 48), hitherto unpublished. 
This was an unfinished project; Crowley, however, finished work on the general 
ascription to each hexagram of the magical formulae of the present Aeon. 


12 


Lafcursiax 


L The 22nd Ray appears behind the Tree 

^ / fc in the tunnel guarded by Lafcursiax 

K nr whose number is 671. She responds to a 

W 1/ ■ ( 3 ) prolonged vibration of her name in ‘F’ 
sharp (upper register). 671 is a number 
* * of major importance in the traditional 

qabalah. It is the number of the Law (ThORA), the Gate 
(ThROA), the Wheel or Chakra (ThARO), and the Goddess 
of Love (AThOR, or Hathor). It is also the number of 
Adonai, the Holy Guardian Angel, spelt in full. These ideas 
combined adumbrate the formula of this path, for when the 
chakra of the goddess is subject to the law or rule of 671 (i.e. 
Lafcursiax), the Gate of the Abyss is thrown open. 

Adonai is a glyph of the Sun; the word is usually trans¬ 
lated as the ‘Lord’, but beneath the Path Adonai becomes 
Aidoneus which is a form of Had , 1 the Lord of Hell. The 
name Aidoneus means Invisible or Unseen; in the present 
context, the invisible form of Adonai which may be evoked 
by the formula of Lafcursiax. This involves the kind of 
sexual magick peculiar to the IX® * O.T.O., as shown in the 
sigil, which is a glyph of Unbalance. It should be painted in 
pale green on a rich blue ground. It shows a pair of scales 
upset by a crooked demon with an inane countenance. The 





214 Nightside of Eden 

demon’s left hand is in the form of a yod enclosed in a circle 
from which falls obliquely a sword or long-armed cross. The 
yod in the circle symbolizes the Work of the IX°, O.T.O. The 
scales symbolize the constellation Libra which rules Path 
22. Its reflection in the abyss is tilted by Lafcursiax whose 
tunnel runs oblique to this path. It represents a blasphemy 
against that ‘adjustment’ which is the formula of this Path. 
‘Adjustment’ is also the title of the Tarot trump ascribed to 
it. That which in manifestation is a pathway of Justice and 
Equilibrium (ThORA, Law) is based upon the oblique path¬ 
way symbolized by the falling cross or sword. The tilting 
scales, swinging in chaos and confusion, suggest the formula 
of the Funambulatory Pathway described by Austin Spare. 2 

The Egyptian deity attributed to Path 22 is Maat, and it is 
easy to recognize in the tunnel of Lafcursiax the distortion 
of Maat’s symbols: the balance, the feather, the sword, etc. 
The doctrine is resumed in verse 11 of Liber CCXXXI: 

Also the lady Maat with her feather and her sword abode to judge 

the righteous. For Fate was already established. 

The Cross of Equilibrium is awry and the Scales upset; the 
‘Ruler of the Balance’ has been put down as the Lord of the 
Abyss opens the gate of the Dark Goddess and brings forth 
fantastic beings that haunt this tunnel in the form of 
ravenous birds with the faces of women who snatch away the 
souls of the living from their mortal clay. Hence the name 
of the Order of Qliphoth reigning with Lafcursiax is 
A’abirion, meaning ‘The Clayey’, for their talons drip with 
the ribbons of flesh (or mortal clay) that their ravening rips 
from the souls of the living. This symbolism is confirmed by 
the ascription to this Ray of the African Egungun (bones of 
the dead). Egungun was the entification of Law and Order 
in the primal African Mysteries. 

Aidoneus or Hades is a form of the Plutonian Current that 
rules the Abyss. The magical siddhi associated with this 

2 See Images and Oracles of Austin Osman Spare, Part IL, and remarks on the 
symbolism of the swing or cradle, page 128 supra. 


Lafcursiax 215 

tunnel is ability to balance upon the treacherous and funam¬ 
bulatory way that leads from the negative to the postive in 
the realm of creative chaos. In other words, it enables the 
magician to spin a web across the gulf of the Abyss, thus 
constructing a tenuous and perilous bridge between non- 
being and being. 

Understandably, the animal sacred to this formula is the 
spider, and the precision and symmetry of this Path are 
exemplified by the ideas of Truth and Justice (Maat). 



13 

Malkunofat 


THE 23rd kala is under the dominion of 
Malkunofat who lies in the depth of the 
* watery abyss. He may be aroused by a shrill 
stridulation of his name in the key of ‘G’ 
sharp (upper register). The sigil should be 
painted in deep blue on an inverted triangle 
of sea-green hue. His number is 307 which is that of VRIATz, 
a ‘night demon’ of the second decanate of Scorpio, and 
having therefore an essentially sexual reference. It is also the 
number of LZRO, meaning ‘to sow’, derived from the root 
ZRO, ‘semen’. 



There is in this number an element of panic terror exem¬ 
plified in the word ShVA, which means ‘to make a noise’, 
‘crash’, ‘be terrible’. It derives from the Egyptian word shefi, 
signifying ‘terror, terrify’, ‘terrible’ or ‘demon-like’. It is the 
root of the name Shiva, the Hindu god of destruction. 

These ideas are apparent in the sigil which is in the form 
of a portrait of Malkunofat, with the letters NVH descending 
in that order beside a downward-pointing arrow. The key to 
this glyph lies in the number 61, which is the number of 
NVH. 61 is Ain, meaning ‘Not’. Ain is identical with Ayin, 
the yoni or eye of the void. According to Crowley, 1 61 is ‘a 
number rather like 31’. 31 is LA, ‘Not’, and AL, ‘God’, thus 

1 See An Essay Upon Number, The Equinox, I, v. p. 101. 


Malkunofat 217 

identifying the Absolute with the Void. Ani, the ego, 61, is 
also void. 61 is the number of Kali, Goddess of Time and 
Dissolution. Her colour is black, which equates her on the 
one hand with the void of space, and on the other with the 
symbolism of sexual magick typified by the blackness of 
gestation, the silence and darkness of the womb. Above all, 
61 is the number of the ‘Negative conceiving itself as a Posi¬ 
tive’. 1 This it does through the BTN (61) or womb of Kali. 
BTN derives from the Egyptian but, the determinative of 
which is the vagina sign. The womb is the nave or NVH (61) 
which in metathesis becomes HVN, meaning ‘wealth’, the 
nature of which is explained by metonymy. The reference 
is recondite and pertains to the Goddess of the lunar serpent 
that appears only when it wishes to drink. It then rests its 
tail on the ground and thrusts its mouth into the water. It 
is said that ‘he who finds the exrement of this serpent is rich 
forever’. 3 The excrement to which allusion is made is not 
anal, but menstrual. 

The formula of the sigil may be interpreted as the sub¬ 
jection of the womb or woman by Malkunofat for the 
purpose of acquiring wealth. The Atu corresponding to the 
Tunnel of Malkunofat is entitled The Hanged Man: The 
Spirit of the Mighty Waters. This is indicated by the down¬ 
ward pointing arrow alongside the NVH, and it implies the 
light (or gold) in the Depths. This symbolism accords with 
the magic siddhi attributed to Path 23, i.e. the power of 
skrying. In verse 12 of CCXXXI, the process appears in its 
mystical form: 

Then the holy one appeared in the great water of the North [i.e. the 

Abyss] ; as a golden dawn did he appear, bringing benediction to the 

fallen universe. 

The tunnel of Malkunofat is the abode of the Deep Ones, 
of which the Arch devil Leviathan is the generic symbol. The 
Sepher Yetzirah refers to Leviathan as Theli, the Dragon. Its 
number is 440 which is the number of LBBVTh, ‘placentae’, 

2 777 Revised, p. xxv. 

3 Fetichism and Fetich Worshippers, P. Baudin, p. 47. 




218 Nigh tside of Eden 

or ‘cakes’, a reference to the excrement above mentioned. 4 
It is also the number of ThM, meaning ‘to come to an end’, 
from the Egyptian atem, ‘to annihilate’. This is the dragon of 
darkness whose number is 5, being the formula of the female 
in her lunar and nocturnal form. s 

MacGregor Mathers calls attention to the fact 6 that ‘this 
dragon is said by the author of the Royal Valley to be the 
king of all the “shells” or demons’, and he suggests com¬ 
parison with the beast in Revelation. According to The Book 
of Concealed Mystery ‘the serpent (i.e. Leviathan) came upon 
the woman, and formed in her a nucleus of impurity, in order 
that he might make the habitation (habitaculum) evil’. The 
nucleus of impurity is the substance of which water is the 
symbol. Water (i.e. blood) is the element attributed to the 
23rd Path. 

It is this ‘nucleus of impurity’ which the Adept gathers 
about him for the work of the next (24th) kala. It should be 
understood that the term ‘nucleus of impurity’ is a legacy of 
the Old Aeon, 7 when all that pertained to woman was con¬ 
sidered unwholesome. In terms of physiology she was 
considered unclean, impure, and, in the moral sphere, ‘evil’. 
The substance thus vilified was the water of life, i.e. blood; 
and because its manifestation in the female determined the 
period of negation or non-openness to the male, it was 
execrated by an all-male regime as detestable, noisome, and 
wholly negative. In the New Aeon of Horns, however, this 
water is the menstruum of manifestation without which the 
phenomenal universe would be an impossibility. It is the 
means of incarnation as well as of magical reification, and as 
such it is the prime substance of all being, which is NOT 
(Nuit). This Mystery is of a mystical order and can be under¬ 
stood only when the nature of the Goddess is fathomed in 
its fulness. 

4 Cf. the ‘cakes of light’ (AL. III. 25). These are the ‘cakes of darkness*. 

s The Greek Pente, 5, also adds up to 440. 

6 The Book of Concealed Mystery, p. 53. 

7 The Aeon of Osiris of which the Judaistic cults, including Christianity, are 
the last remaining forms. 


14 

Niantiel 


THE 24th Tunnel is under the influence 
of Scorpio and sentinelled by Niantiel 
whose number is 160. The name of this 
qlipha should be intoned in ‘G’ (lower 
register) in a manner suggestive of a bub¬ 
bling cauldron of molten lava, for Mars 
is the predominating planetary power. 

The sigil should be painted in lurid indigo brown — like 
a black beetle’ 1 — on an equilateral triangle of greenish blue. 

The number 160 is that of QIN, the ‘nucleus of impurity’ 
mentioned in connection with the previous tunnel. It is also 
the number of LNSK, ‘for a drink offering’, which indicates 
the sacrament associated with the formula of Niantiel, i.e. 
that of the IX°~ O.T.O. 2 But a lesser or subsidiary formula is 
implied by the name MNO (160), which means ‘to restrain’ 
or ‘keep back’, implying the technique of Karezza. 

Other relevant concepts are Otz, ‘tree’, the Tree of Life, 
and IQIM, a ‘setter up’, from the Egyptian Khem, meaning 
‘ithyphallic’; also IPhO, ‘he shone forth’, from the Egyptian 
Af, which denotes the sun in the lower hemisphere. 3 This 
idea is confirmed by the verse from CCXXXI which reads: 

'See 777 Revised, Table I, column xviii. 

2 See p. 205 supra. 

3 The solar-phallic energy operating in Amenta as exemplified in the formula 
of the DC 0 " O.T.O. 





220 Nightside of Eden 

Also Asar was hidden in Amenti; and the Lords of Time swept him 

with the sickle of death. 

The Lords of Time are represented in the tunnel of Niantiel 
by the infernal waters of Scorpio which imply the alchemical 
formula of purification via putrefaction. The ‘infernal waters’ 
are the ‘nucleus of impurity’ already explained. They suggest 
the symbolism of the rainbow as the seal of the deluge from 
the abyss of space. 

The number 160 is that of TzLM, ‘an image’, and this is 
depicted in the sigil of Niantiel as an image of Death with a 
five-rayed crown bearing a cross-handled scythe beside the 
Cross of Set. It is an image of death because the water of 
purification is the blood that negates life in manifestation, 
while at the same time affirming it in the Abyss where the 
blood is sucked in 4 as a ‘drink offering’ in the rite of the 
infernal IX°“. The five-rayed crown is the circle or cycle of 
the five kalas typical of the feminine phase of Negation: the 
lunar period that eclipses ‘life’ in the form of MPLI, 5 which 
means literally ‘flakes of flesh’. The symbol of Pente, Five, 
and of the Pentagram as the Seal or Star of Nuit (Not), has 
been explained in The Magical Revival. 

The animals prowling in the shadows of this tunnel include 
the wolf and — as Crowley notes apropos the 24th Path — 
‘the hound as a kind of wolf also pertains here’. 6 This is the 
hound Cerberus who guards the Abyss. He is the ‘great Beast 
of Hell ... not of Tiphereth without, but Tiphereth within’ 7 
meaning the infernal sun in Amenta, the phallus in anus 8 as 
distinct from the supernal sun, or the ordinary IX° formula. 

Also ascribed to this 24th kala are the scorpion and the 
beetle, both symbols of the Dark Sun. 

The typical disease connected with Path 24 is cancer, 
which links up with the beede symbolism which preceded 
that of the crab as the sign of the midnight sun, the traverser 

4 INQ, ‘sucked’, 160. 

s This word also adds to 160. 

6 777 Revised. 

IMagick, p. 491. 

8 Unnatural congress. 


Niantiel 221 

of the backward path in the widdershins world of the Abyss. 
The god-forms appropriate are Typhon, Apep, Khephra, the 
Merti Goddesses, 9 and Sekhet, the sun of sexual heat, the 
‘savage’ sun in the south as opposed to the great Cat-headed 
Goddess, Bast, the ‘gende’ mother of the north. 

In The Book of Thoth, Atu XIII is attributed to this ray 
and its tide is Lord of the Gate of Death. In the Zos Kia 
Cultus of Austin O. Spare, the adept in this tunnel assumes 
the ‘death posture’ and becomes one with cosmic conscious¬ 
ness by a retroversion of the senses. 

The tantric adept achieves a similar result by the formula 
of viparita described in the Typhonian Trilogy. This formula 
links up with the Mystere du Zombeeisme in The Cult of the 
Black Snake, 10 and the magical power ascribed to this 
mystery is Necromancy, which comports the use of the 
IX°~. Necrophilia also belongs here as that aspect of medi¬ 
tation on Dissolution that leads the adept to the portal of 
the Ultimate Mystery of Non-Being. The specifically sexual 
nature of the formula is made apparent in the attribution to 
this tunnel of the energies of Scorpio which rule the genital 
chakras. In a marginal note in his personal copy of Liber 777, 
Crowley wrote: ‘In the New Aeon, Scorpio is the Woman- 
Serpent’. This means that the initiator of the adept is hidden 
in the image of Death with a five-rayed crown, 11 the sym¬ 
bolism of which has already been explained in connection 
with the feminine number, five. 

In the African pantheon, the goddess of the rainbow, 
Aidowedo, pertains to this current. Here, however, the bow is 
not manifest but latent in the depth of the abyss. The 
opposite and fructive formula is that of the XI° where the 
rainbow appears in its full splendour in the heaven of Nu. But 
here, in the hell of Hecate all is dark, and the serpent Dangbe 
— the Black Snake — leaves in its wake a trail of slime that 

9 i.e. the goddesses of death. 

I °La Couleuvre Noire. Its present chief is Michael Bertiaux. See Cults of the 
Shadow, chapters 9 and 10. 

II i.e. woman. 





Niantiel 


222 Nightside of Eden 

indicates the presence of the Necheshtheron, the Brazen 
Serpents, that haunt the tunnel of Niantiel. 

Of ‘the six basic points whcih pertain to the . . . tubes and 
tunnels of astral and mental matter’, Michael Bertiaux cites 
as the fifth the Mystere du Zombeeisme , which equates with 
this tunnel of Niantiel. He describes this Mystery as the 
‘magic of the Black Temple of Atlantis in its first form . . . 
The magician works directly with the dead, especially 
through their astral shells and forms’. Of Black Temple Work 
he says that ‘it was concerned with death, and certain “cult 
of death” rites in both esoteric Voudoo and Tantra come 
from this tradition’. 12 

The Black Temple Work of Atlantis related to the Mysteries 
of the Dead as the Red Temple Work related to those of 
Sexual Magick, and both varieties linger on into the present 
cycle of the human life-wave. They were condemned as 
‘black magic’ by the old-aeon Cult of Osiris. 

Since the Mysteries of Death concern the 24th kala it is 
necessary to understand the kind of magic practised by the 
Atlanteans of the Black Temple. It is well known to occultists 
that at the moment of sexual orgasm the Adept is able to 
launch a creative thought-construct which penetrates the 
astral envelope of his psyche and reifies in matter at a time 
appointed by the magician. A similar mechanism operates 
at the moment of death. When the soul quits its earthly 
vehicle, the Adept of the Death Cult can direct it to any given 
location. Black magicians could by this means capture the 
soul of an individual and make it subservient to his will. This 
is the method of creating zombies. But the original Atlantean 
version of this sorcery involved elements of sexual magick. 
A consecrated priestess was slain in a special manner and the 
Adept copulated with her shade to produce a zombie on the 
astral plane. This was also, if required, incarnated via a living 
woman through the natural process of birth. The zombie 
produced in this way was not a soulless mechanism — as in 

12 Michad Bertiaux: Monastery of the Seven Rays; Grade Paper of the Fourth 
Year Course. 


223 

the case of a zombie produced by Haitian Voodoo — but a 
highly intelligent though automatic entity combining the 
vividness and plasticity of astral consciousness with the 
magical qualities of the Adept himself. It was literally a child 
of the dead, yet equipped with magical powers and with all 
the faculties of humanity except that of the Will. Bertiaux 
correctly observes: ‘Voudou and witchcraft’ came ‘from the 
same mystical parent, i.e. the old religions of Atlantis’. 13 

The zombie just described was a true familiar spirit. The 
god-form assumed by the Adept at the moment of death (or 
orgasm) determined the form, human or animal, of die 
familiar spirit. The Atlantean zombie is the result of the 
Adept retaining his human shape at the climax of the ritual. 
The witches of more recent aeons disguised their familiars 
as animals, yet even so they became suspect in the eyes of 
non-initiates. In Atlantean times the process did not carry 
the moral opprobrium it later gained. 

The necromancy of the Black Brothers, on the other hand, 
consisted of physical contact with the dead and many Adepts 
of the Death Cult became addicted to necrophilia. The prac¬ 
tice involved sexual congress with a ritually slain woman 
dedicated to the deity with whom contact was sought. An 
Asiatic sect of necromancers sequestered specially selected 
virgins ioxpost mortem traffic with the gods. Sexual congress 
occurred shortly after death. The shade of the virgin was 
extracted by a method known as the ‘vampire vortex’ and 
propelled into an intermediary dimension between terrestrial 
and post mortem consciousness. At this stage the spirit is still 
partially earthed. Sexual stimulus was again applied to arouse 
to a maximum pitch of sensitivity the astral spirit of the 
priestess which was thereby energized and awakened from 
the post mortem torpor and able to receive and transmit the 
subtlest impressions reflected in the astral aethers. The 
woman’s body appeared to leap like a frog as her limbs 
twitched convulsively at each impact of the sexual onslaught. 
This throws further light on the frog totem and the reason 

13 See previous note. 



Niantiel 


224 Nightside of Eden 

for its assignment to the ‘lady of the tomb’ in certain dark 
cults hinted at in grimoires of Asiatic sorcery. Such may have 
been the source of H. P. Lovecraft’s references to the 
‘abominable plateau of Leng’ which, in his tales, is located 
in central Asia. However this may be, there is no doubt that 
the frog was a magical symbol connected not only with the 
Voltigeurs or Leapers of the Paths, but also with the mortuary 
rites that caused the body of the dead priestess to simulate 
saltant and batrachian convulsions. 

Passing from Lovecraft’s fictions to Robert Temple’s book 
The Sirius Mystery; in speaking of Proclus, Temple observes 
that he ‘had a particular connection with rites involving 
Hecate, the goddess whom we know to be a form of the star 
Sirius’. Hecate was the Greek form of the Egyptian Hekt or 
Ur-Hekau, the ‘great magic power’ ascribed to the lunar cur¬ 
rent. Temple further observes that ‘the name of the Greek 
goddess Hecate literally means in Greek “one hundred” \ 14 
This is the number of the letter Qoph which is ascribed to the 
moon. Qoph means the ‘back of the head’ and this is where 
the ‘creative or reproductive force is primarily situated’. 15 
Furthermore, Temple states that the African tribe known as 
the Dogon ‘claim that amphibious creatures with fish tails 
founded their civilization .. . and they came from the system 
of the star Sirius’. 16 In other words, there is a subtle con¬ 
nection between Hecate, the Frog (an amphibious creature), 
Sirius, the Moon, and sexuality. It would be beyond the 
scope of this section to pursue the subject, but it may be 
noted that the Atlantean forms of magic involving the pro¬ 
duction of zombies were no less than the black perversions 
of the Death Cultists, probably connected with the formula 
of the voltigeurs, and were aimed at incarnating extra¬ 
terrestrial entities such as those mentioned by Temple. 17 

14 The Sirius Mystery, p. IIS. 

1 i Magick, p. 183. 16 The Sirius Mystery, p. 207. 

17 As explained in the Typhonian Trilogy, the star Sirius or Sothis is the Star 
of the A.'.A/. (Argenteum Astium; the Silver Star). It was thus the source of 
humanity’s contact with extra-terrestrial influences, and the system of attainment 
taught in the mundane Order of the A.'.A.’., although now hidden, is of truly 
extra-terrestrial origin. 


225 

This highly complex 24th kala comports therefore various 
kinds of sexual magick. For the sake of convenience they 
may be subsumed beneath the IX°' O.T.O. The elements 
involved are all related to the backward path of the Sun in 
Amenta; to the formula of Scorpio (purification via putre¬ 
faction); or to the necromantic and necrophiliac sorcery 
associated with the Mystere du Zombeeisme and the Cult of 
the Dead; and to the retention of the sun-seed in the practise 
of Karezza. It is therefore not surprising that to the path, 
of which Niantiel’s cell is the tunnel are attributed lamiae, 
stryges, and witches. 






Saksaksalim 


227 


15 


Saksaksalim 


D THE ^ um * nes t ^ ie Tunnel of 

t A w K * Saksaksalim whose number is 300 and 

\HI V 7 whose non-being may be induced to 

V PL T assume form by the vibration of a high 

L I pitched electric crackling sound in the key 

of ‘G’ sharp. The sigil should be painted in 
bright yellow on a vivid dark blue ground, like lightning 
against the nightsky. 300 is the number of Shin, the letter of 
Spirit. It is the triple fire-tongue symbolic of Chozzar, 1 the 
disintegrating principle of antimatter. AVR BPAHH (Khabs 
Am Pekht, ‘Tight in .Extension’) also has this number. It is 
the False Light, the Great Lie, which is the Word of Choron- 
zon mirrored in the Abyss. Hence, KPhR, 300, is a substance 
used for covering with pitch or ashes. It derives from the 
Egyptian word Khepr, ‘to transform’, ‘reverse’, or ‘ regenerate 
the dead’. The dead are the swathed or bound mummies, and 
SMR means ‘horror’, ‘as if bound with fear’, ‘horripilation’ 
(see Job. IV. 15), from the Egyptian smar, ‘to bind or 
enswathe for slaughter’, The concepts of reversal, trans¬ 
formation, and annihilation are also implied. 

The sigil of Saksaksalim shows the figure of a priest (with 
arms extended in the form of a cross) hanging upside down 
in an irregularly bound void in which appear the letters SKR 
1 Cf. the sign of Neptune. 


(200) and an inverted figure 7. The void is sealed by the 
image of a black lunar crescent emitting streams of blood. 
This sigil resumes the ideas relating to the number 300 and to 
the magical siddhi of the 25th path, i.e. Transmutations and 
the Vision of the Universal Peacock. 2 The peacock is a 
symbol of Shaitan and comports the rainbow symbolism 
previously explained, thus showing the feminine nature of 
the transforming fire of this kala. 

The number 280 is that of RP, meaning ‘terror’. It is also 
the number of squares on the side of the Vault containing the 
body of Christian Rosencreutz in the Golden Dawn sym¬ 
bolism of the 5° = 6 D Grade, which should be studied in 
connection with the symbolism of this tunnel. 3 

The relevant verse from Liber CCXXXI reads: 

And a mighty angel appeared as a woman, pouring vials of woe upon 

the flames, lighting the pure stream with her brand of cursing. And 

the iniquity was very great. 

The Angel as the woman cursing represents the feminine 
current symbolized by Nephthys, the sister of Isis. Nephthys 
is the reifier or transmitter of perfection; the art of trans¬ 
forming raw (i.e. virgin) nature into the image of fulfilment 
or motherhood. 

The Order of Qliphoth associated with this process is the 
Nechashiron, or Snakey, and the Atu of Tahuti attributed 
to Kala 25 is appropriately entitled The Bringer Forth of Life. 

In the African pantheon, Aidowedo — the rainbow goddess 
— is the cognate deity. Her coming is likened to the lightning- 
flash. This is the Sagittarian influence manifesting in the form 
of the female current. ‘Her fetish is a large serpent that 
appears only when it wants to drink. It then rests its tail on 
the ground and thrusts its mouth into the water. It is said 
that he who finds the excrement of this serpent is rich 
forever’. 4 

2 This vision falls under the influence of Sagittarius, the constellation asso¬ 
ciated with the 25th Path. 

3 See The Equinox, L it 

4 Seepage 217, supra. 


16 


A’ano’nin 


y THE 26th Tunnel is under the aegis of 

g-jfO A’ano’nin, whose number is 237. His name 
//k should be uttered in a raucous and bleating 
/Y tone in the key of ‘A’. His sigil should be 

(/ ^ painted in black within an indigo-coloured 

N and inverted pentagram. 

This tunnel underlies the 26th path which transmits the 
16th kala in the series of microcosmic kalas commencing 
with the 11th path. It should at this point be remembered 
that the Cosmic or Aeonic power-zones constitute the ten 
sephiroth, Daath being not a kala in the strict sense of the 
term but a Gate of Ingress and Egress of Aiwass (78) via 
Kether. 1 The microcosmic or sexual power-zones are the 22 
Paths which, together with the 10 Aeonic or macrocosmic 
power-zones, make 32 in all. 

The 22 Paths are reflections in human consciousness of 
the power-zones of cosmic consciousness. The aeons may also 


1 There are 78 keys or calls in the Book of Thoth and they all have a place on 
the Tree of Life. 78 is a number of Aiwass, the extra-terrestrial Intelligence that 
communicated to Crowley the Law of the present Aeon of Homs. It is also the 
number of Mezla, the influence from above, or beyond. Note that 26 (the number 
of this tunnel) times 3 (the number of Saturn or Set) equals 78. Note also that 
Atu XVI is entitled The Tower or Fortress of God. Cf. the ‘eleven temples of the 
Yezidi’ with the ‘Aeon of eleven towers’ referred to by Crowley in The Cepha- 
loedtum Working. See Mezla (edited Ayers and Siebert), nos. 5 and 6, where this 
Working is published. 


A ’ano ’nin 


229 


be considered in relation to the cerebral centres in man, and 
the kalas in relation to the sexual centres. 2 The psychosexual 
mechanism of the 16 kalas in humanity (8 in the female; 8 
in the male) is reflected from the aeonic centres or cosmic 
power-zones into the cerebro-spinal fluid and endocrine 
system. The 16th kala, in a macrocosmic sense, is equated 
with Path 16, the Path of the Har or Child (Horns). He is 
bom of the Goddess 15, represented on Path 15 as The Star 
whose mystical emblem is the eleventh zodiacal sign, 
Aquarius. This symbolism has been explained in Aleister 
Crowley and the Hidden God, to which the reader is referred. 

The reflection of Horns in the 16th microcosmic kala, 
which is numbered 26, is The Devil, or Double, of Homs, i.e. 
Set. A perfect fusion and balance of forces in the macro- 
and micro-cosms is thus attained in this 26th kala, which is 
ruled by the energies of Capricorn. The Goat is the astro- 
glyph of the Scarlet Woman whose EYE (Ayin) is attributed 
to this path via the symbolism of Atu XV, The Devil. This 
ain, or eye, reaches its fullest extent in the name of the 
Sentinel of this tunnel, i.e. A’ano’nin. His number is 237 
which is also that of Ur-He-Ka, the Magick Power of the 
Goddess ShPhChH (Sefekh), 393. 3 237 is also the number 
of IERAOMI, ‘to be a priest or priestess’, which confirms the 
sacred nature of this number. 

The sigil of A’ano’nin shows the Ur-heka surmounted by 
the head of the priest and surrounded by the letters BKRN, 
which add up to 272. This is the number of Aroa, ‘Earth’, 
and of Bor, ‘to consume’, ‘to be beastly’, ‘brutish’, etc. It is 
also the number of Orb, meaning ‘the evening’, or an Arab, 
i.e. a person living in the West. The West is the place of 
Babalon. Her totem, the goat, is the glyph of earth in the 
west as the place of the setting sun. Obr, a metathesis of Orb 
denotes ‘tears’, ‘myrrh-dropping’, from the Egyptian word 
abr, ‘ambrosia’, ‘ointment’, and from aft, meaning ‘exuding’, 
‘distilling’. 

1 See Cults of the Shadow, chapters 1 and 2, for an explanation of these matters. 

3 See remarks on page 166, supra. 


230 Nightside of Eden 

The magical powers of Path 26 relate to the Witches’ Sabbath 
and the Evil Eye and its kala is that which is distilled by 
the rite of the XF, for the Evil Eye is the Eye of Night (i.e. 
the moon), and the ointment, unguent, or myrrh-dropping is 
the Vinum Sabbati prepared at sundown in the cauldron of 
the Scarlet Woman. Capricorn is the Secret Flame whereon 
the cauldron seethes, hence its connection with Vesta, who, 
together with the deities Khem, Set, Pan, and Priapus, is 
assigned to Path 26. 

The disease typical of this kala is priapism, and the animals 
sacred to it are the oyster, the goat, and the ass. The latter 
is the specific totem of the female and of the qliphoth 
associated with the Moon of Yesod, the Gamaliel or ‘Obscene 
Ass’. 

The tunnel of A’ano’nin is haunted by satyrs, fauns, and 
panic demons, and the Order of Qliphoth associated with it 
is the Dagdagiron, meaning ‘the Fishy’, which denotes the 
feminine nature. The corresponding Magical Weapon is the 
Secret Force represented by the shuttered lamp, which is an 
allusion to the eye concealed in the buttocks of the goat. 

The Taro tic attribution of this Path 26 is the trump 
entitled The Devil, The Lord of the Gates of Matter; for the 
lunar current is the menstruum of reification which seethes 
within the Cup of Babalon. She is the Bride of Choronzon for 
he is in truth Lord of the Gates of Matter. 

According to Liber CCXXXI: 

The Lord Khem arose, He who is holy among the highest, and set 

up his crowned staff for to redeem the universe. 

This means that Set or Pan erects the phallus to redeem 
the universe, the technical formula of which redemption is 
resumed in the XF O.T.O. The Black Diamond is the secret 
symbol of this operation which involves the gross powers of 
generation, for the diamond glitters in the darkness of matter 
as the Eye of Set. 

The African pantheon is represented in this tunnel by 
Legba, the fettish of the ‘knotted stick’, i.e. the phallus. He is 


A ’ano ’nin 231 

sometimes known as Echu, the ‘rejected’; rejected, that is, 
by the non-initiate who is unable to understand the value of 
the First Matter and its relation to the subtler aspects of 
consciousness. First Matter, in this context, is an allusion to 
that excremental fluid that forms part of the Vinum Sabbati. 
This is distilled at the Feast of Legba which is known as 
Odun, and which is undoubtedly the precursor of the Witches’ 
Sabbath. Odun means ‘the year’ and signifies a completed 
cycle of time, thus linking the symbolism with the periodic 
cycle of the female. The reference is to the lunar serpent that 
confers perpetual wealth, hence its association with the Devil 
and Material Power. 

As it is important to make a distinction between the 
magick of the XF as practised by contemporary members of 
the O.T.O., and the interpretation of that degree given by 
Crowley in his Magical Records , 4 I feel justified in quoting 
the following passage from Aleister Crowley & the Hidden 
God concerning the symbolism of this tunnel: 

This symbolism reveals the formula of the XF O.T.O., which is the 
reverse and complementary rite of the IX°. It does not involve the 
sodomitical use of sex, as Crowley supposed, but the use of the lunar 
Current as indicated in his Magical Record by the phrase El. Rub. 
(Elixir Rubeus). 

The ancient Draconian Mysteries of Khem upon which the Cult of 
Shaitan-Aiwass is ultimately based are silent concerning any sodo¬ 
mitical formula except as a perversion of magical practice. In that 
Tradition — the most ancient in the world — Horns and Set originally 
represented North and South; the heat of Set was symbolized by the 
blackening or reddening power of the sun in the south, also by 
Sothis the star which announced the periodic inundation of the Nile, 
mystically interpreted as a phenomenon of the Feminine Mysteries. 
The red mud, the inundation, the ‘blind’ Horus, the Osiris swathed 
in bandages, the weeping or eclipsed sun, all were equally symbolic 
of the periodic cycle of the female nature. Set, as the seat, did not 
symbolize the literal fundament, but the foundation in the lunar and 
Yesodic sense of the physiological flux that is the true basis of 
manifestation and stability. Similarly, the retrogressive symbolism of 
the mediaeval parody of these ancient Mysteries, with its so-called 

4 See The Magical Record of the Beast 666 (Ed. Symonds and Grant), 1972. 




232 


Nightside of Eden 

witches’ Sabbath and os obscaenum, was a still readable reference to 
the lunar formula. The misinterpretation of these Mysteries in anal 
terms is, to the Initiate, as much a perversion of doctrine (and, as 
such, a sacramental blasphemy) as is the recital of the Lord’s Prayer 
backwards and the defilement of the sacraments to the orthodox 
Christian. 5 

s Aleister Crowley and the Hidden God, pp. 109*10. 


17 


Parfaxitas 



THE 27th Tunnel is under the aegis of 
Parfaxitas whose number is 450. His 
name should be vibrated on a deep and 
imperious note of command in the key 
of ‘C’ (lower register), and the sound 
should be reminiscent of thunder. 


His sigil should be drawn in a bright red pigment on an 
emerald square. 


450 is the number of ThN, meaning ‘Dragon’. It is the root 
of Leviathan. 1 Tan, feminine Tanith, is that great dragon of 
the deep that manifests on earth as Babalon, the woman or 
priestess specially consecrated to the work of the Draconian 
Current. 


The formula of Parfaxitas is that of the VIH° + O.T.O., 


which comports the assumption of astral animal forms for 
the reification of atavistic energies. It is described in detail 
by Austin Osman Spare, who refers to the process as that of 
‘atavistic resurgence’. 2 

In the Cult of the Black Snake the formula is known as De 


Mystere Lycanthropique, which Michael Bertiaux describes as 
the ‘Mystery of the Red Temple of Atlantean Magic in its 
first form’, which involves ‘magical transformations into 


‘Seepage 217,supra. 

2 See Images and Oracles of Austin Osman Spare, Part 2. 


234 Nightside of Eden 

were-animals for sexual magic’. In its second form it is known 
as Ataviqier, which is analogous to Spare’s formula of Ata¬ 
vistic Resurgence. 

The O.T.O. version of this formula involves the solitary sex 
working of the magician, who wears an animal mask con¬ 
sonant with the nature of the atavism he intends to re-activate. 
Some magicians wear an actual mask throughout the rite in 
order that the astral assumption may gain substance thereby, 
but this is a matter of personal preference. At the moment of 
the seed’s emission the god-form is projected beyond the aura 
of the magician and nourished by his energy. It then reifies 
on the astral and sometimes on the etheric, plane, where it 
unites sexually with a similar entity projected by a priestess 
working the same rite. A successful working is under¬ 
standably rare, but in cases where the entities attain an 
objective existence, the result of their congress is such that 
a very powerful vortex of energy is generated at astral levels 
of consciousness. It then becomes possible to suck into this 
vortex the superhuman energies of primal atavisms. 

The tunnel of Parfaxitas is littered with hybrid creatures 
resulting from imperfectly performed operations of this nature. 

The animals traditionally associated with this ray are the 
Owl and the Wolf, hence Le Mystere Lycanthropique. 

The number of Parfaxitas — 450 — is that of KShPIM, 
meaning ‘incantations’, ‘witchcrafts’, ‘sorceries’; and of 
PShO, ‘transgression’, which in this context denotes a cross¬ 
ing over into the astral or spirit world. This is confirmed by 
the word AThMCha (also 450), ‘to be crucified’, which 
signifies the crossing over from bodily to spiritual awareness. 3 
The word AThMChA derives from the Egyptian makha, 
meaning ‘balance’, ‘level’, or ‘crossing’. 

The sigil of Parfaxitas depicts a Fortress with a door and 
two windows (eyes) superposed upon the letters SUE, 4 the 

3 See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 2. 

4 SUE may be an abbreviation of the first name of Crowley’s scarlet woman at 
the time he received this sigil. Other examples of the inclusion of personal names 
in the ‘transmitted’ writings, or Holy Books, may be cited. See, for instance, 
verses 1 and 2 of Liber LXVI (Equinox, I, vi), Liber LXV, V, 43 (Equinox, m, i). 
See also The Bagh-i-Muattar. 


Parfaxitas 235 

number of which is 71, which is the number of LAM. 5 

The fortress is magically protected by the letters M V N D 
V S D (170). 6 The number 71 is that of ALIL, which means 
‘nothing’, ‘an apparition’ or ‘image’, and serves to show the 
astral or non-physical nature of the formula of Parfaxitas. It 
is also the number of ChZVN, ‘vision’, and of AIMK, ‘thy 
terror’. It is also the number of ‘Silence’. On the other hand, 
170 is active and is the number of MQL, the ‘wand’ or 
‘baculus’, i.e. the phallus of the magician. It is also the 
number of Nephilim, NPIL meaning ‘a giant’, the mythical 
designation of a god or extra-terrestrial being, from the 
Egyptian word Nepr, ‘a god’. 7 The two numbers together 
denote the formula of the VIII° + O.T.O., which involves the 
use of the Turret of Silence and of the Tower of Shaitan 
(i.e. the wand), in which isolation it conjures images or visions 
from the Void. 

The path above this tunnel is consecrated to Works of 
Wrath and Vengeance, which shows the markedly martial 
nature of the current which — in the tunnel beneath it — is 
interpreted in the form of primal atavisms. Furies and Were¬ 
wolves haunt its shadows, and the Sword is the magical 
weapon associated with the deities Mentu, Mars, and Horns 
the ‘flaming God’ who rages ‘through the firmament with 
his fantastic spear’. 8 According to Liber CCXXXI : ‘He smote 
the towers of wailing; he brake them in pieces in the fire of 
his anger, so that he alone did escape from the ruin thereof’. 

As Scholem has pointed out, 9 the concepts of divine wrath 
are connected with the purgative current, which in its primary 
sense is the purgation associated with the feminine cycle. The 
blood shed by the female at the time of puberty was the 
purifying or ‘redeeming’ water of life. This was the first blood 

5 See page 125, supra. 

6 The Fortress is a form of the Tower, the symbolism of which has been 
treated in Part L 

7 See chapter 7( Part I). 

& Liber Libert vel Lapidis Lazuli (Crowley), chapter vii, verse iii. 

9 On the Kabbalah and its Symbolism, by Gershom G. Scholem, Routledge 
and Kegan Paul, 1965. 



236 Nightside of Eden 

sacrifice as it was also the first sacrament. 10 The blood shed 
in battle was a secondary form of this symbolism and per¬ 
tained to Mars and the Martian Current. It is in the primary 
sense of purgation that the expression ‘Works of Wrath and 
Vengeance’ should be understood. 

Fevers and wounds are the diseases typical of Path 27; also 
Inflammation, the redness of which is symbolic of the wound 
of puberty, the first gash being the female cleft with its 
issue of blood. Hence the Sword as the cleaver or splitter 
open is symbolic of the vagina, and was so interpreted in 
the primitive astronomical mysteries. 11 This was continued 
in the symbolism of the sickle attributed to Saturn, the later 
planetary representative of the primal Goddess in the 
heavens. 11 

The precious stone associated with this 27th kala is the 
ruby or red stone; the characteristic plants are rue, peppers, 
and absinthe, all noted for their fiery qualities. 

I °See Aleister Crowley & the Hidden God, chapter 11, note 53. 

II The celestial Great Mother was symbolized by the constellation known as 
the haunch or thigh. 

15 Note that the sickle, or sign of Saturn, is a form of the figure 5 — the num¬ 
ber of the female as symbolic of Nuit (Le. the Negative source of all positivity). 


18 


Tzuflifu 


^ THE 28th tunnel is sentinelled by Tzuflifu, 

A/} whose number is 302 and whose name should 
P H be chanted in the key of ‘A’ sharp. The sigil 
/ \ should be painted in white on a violet ground. 

AjlA 302 is the number of BQR, ‘to cut open’, 
^ ‘inquire into’, ‘dawn’, ‘dawning of light’, 
from the Egyptian beka, meaning ‘to extend’, pekai, ‘to 
flower’. Its anagram, BRQ means ‘to lighten’, ‘send lightning’, 
as applied to the Great Serpent (of the Gnostics), from the 
Egyptian buiruka, meaning ‘fulgurant’, ‘glittering’. A further 
metathesis, QBR, signifies ‘a cave’, ‘hole in the earth’, ‘tomb’. 
These three letters therefore constitute the type-name of a 
place of divination founded on the oracle of the womb. 

The sigil shows a Priest or King wearing a crown in the 
shape of a phallus with its ‘eye’ protruding. This is an image 
of the Great Serpent extended or ‘flowering’, its eye sig¬ 
nifying the dawning or opening power of the phallus. 

The Atu pertaining to Path 28 is that of The Emperor , 
who is also called ‘Sun of the Morning and Chief among the 
Mighty’. In the Tunnel of Tzuflifu this dawn assumes an 
almost deliquescent state of heat that resembles a fluid 
fire-ball. 

The disease typical of Path 28 is apoplexy, and the demons 
which haunt the tunnel are the furies bom of the blood of 
Uranus who was castrated for crimes against the ‘ties of 


238 


Nightside of Eden 

kinship’. The furies (or Erinyes) are depicted in Greek myth 
as winged women girt with snakes, thus revealing their 
affinity with the lunar current. 

Uranus is the planet assigned to Daath, with its symbolism 
of reversion to the source of Non-Being, hence the crime of 
incest associated with this tunnel. 

The relevant verse of Liber CCXXXI reads: 

Transformed, the holy virgin appeared as a fluidic fire, making her 
beauty into a thunderbolt. 

The thunderbolt typifies the swastika, the whirling or spiral 
force that restores the world ‘ruined by evil’. In this tunnel 
‘evil’ (or chaos) emerges in its raw state through the Gate of 
the Abyss in the form of lightning (BRQ). In an article 
entitled ‘Life, Death and Antimatter’ 1 there appears the 
following: 

Antimatter seems mostly or possibly always to penetrate the world 
of physical matter through spirals, especially geometric spirals, 
at the centre of which the threshold between time and antitime 
apparently exists. Energy appears to move both ways across this 
threshold. 2 

Later on in the same article it is claimed that the ‘human 
body is composed of three major spirals oriented around the 
cerebral aqueduct and the fourth ventricle’. If the reader will 
refer to Cults of the Shadow (chapters 1 and 4) he will see 
the force of these remarks in relation to the kala that charges 
the tunnel of Tzuflifu. 

The African pantheon relating to this kala reveals the 
original basis of the above formula. Path 28 is under the 
influence of Aries (ruled by Mars), which is represented by 
the fiery aspect of Chango and the god Ogoun with his 
flaming darts, or manamana (literally ‘chains of fire’, i.e. 
lightning). As previously explained, the martial symbolism 
of violent heat, and super-abundant energy, denotes the 
feminine power that reaches its peak in the Tunnel of Qulielfi 
(see next section). 

•The article, by Henry Conway, appeared in Frontiers of Consciousness, The 
Julian Press Inc., New York, 1974. 

2 Italics by present author. Cf. Daath as the Gate of the Abyss. 


19 

Qulielfi 


TUNNEL 29 is under the influence of the 
A moon and is the haunt of the witch typi- 
^ £ fled by Hekt, the frog-headed goddess 

^ ^ and Lady of Transformation. 

Qulielfi is the sentinel; her number is 
™ 266 and her name should be intoned in 

the key of ‘B’. Her sigil is to be traced in silver — like slug- 
slime — on a circular stone. The sigil shows 22 inverted lunar 
crescents, for Qulielfi represents the termination of the 
qliphoth of the 12 zodiacal signs. The central three crescents 
surmount a blind eye raying downward. This symbolism 
refers to the three viable days of the five-day lunar flow when 
the phallus turns a blind eye to the Eye of the Moon as she 
shreds her menstruum of astral creation. Hence the magical 
power attributed to this 29th kala is that of Casting Illusions 
and Bewitchments generally. As it is written: 


It is from the excrement of Choronzon that one takes the material 
for the creation of a God. 1 


The title of the tarot trump ascribed to Path 29 is The 
Moon, its alternative title being the ‘Ruler of Flux and 
Reflux’, and the magic mirror is the sole item of equipment 
in the lunar temple when Qulielfi is evoked. The mirror 
denotes the crepuscular state of consciousness peculiar to 
some regions of the astral plane. It is in this state that success- 

1 See The Vision and the Voice (Liber 418), Equinox I, v. 


240 Nightside of Eden 

ful astral working is achieved, for at the borderland of sleep 
and waking are the ‘liers in wait’,* those elementals that assist 
in the reification of the inherent dream. 3 

The secret symbol of this tunnel is a dreaming woman 
performing in her twilight state the manual magick veiled 
beneath the symbol of the VIII°“ O.T.O. The number of 
Qulielfi confirms this symbolism for 266 is SVR, meaning 
‘olla’, ‘a pot’ or ‘vase’, a glyph of the vulva in its passive and 
solitary phase. 

But the formula of this tunnel comports another element 
that is by no means as passive. It is under the sign of the 
Frog, the transformer from the waters. This totem typifies 
the evolution of consciousness from the amphibious to the 
terrestrial state. The frog is the Ieaper or jumper, which 
implies a specific formula in connection with the ‘other side’ 
of the Tree of Life. In the Cult of the Black Snake this 
formula is referred to as that of the Voltiguers, the vaulters 
or leapers. Michael Bertiaux alludes to the “pathway of the 
Voltigeurs’ in connection with the voodoo ‘vever of the 
Marassas, or Twins’. 4 The vever shows the three columns of 
the Tree represented by the central pole of the houngan’s 
tent or hut. Bertiaux has crossed these three columns with 
the baton of Guede Nibho 5 to show the way of the voltigeurs 
‘as well as the pathways for the secret schools of Voodou 
initiation’. He goes on to say that ‘Behind each of the 
Sephiroth there are the secret pathways . . . pathways 
developed by very specialised magicians and their apprentices 
within the various secret sects which are based entirely on 
magical discoveries and insights, and communicated by 

2 The ‘liers in wait’ are mentioned by Lovecraft, in connection with the 
fictitious Necronomicon, in a passage that refers also to Chorazin. (See The 
Lurker at the Threshold, by H. P. Lovecraft). This is the City of Babalon, as 
Choronzon may be called the City of the Beast. The Tunnd of Qulielfi leads to 
the city of Chorazin and the liers-in-wait are the Qliphotic ring-pass-not without 
the City. The Liers in Wait may equate with the Ghagiel (The Hinderers) listed in 
Liber 777 as the Order of Qliphoth (column viii) associated with the Masloth or 
Sphere of the Fixed Stars. 

3 In Crowley’s Cult of the Beast, the True Will 

4 See Cults of the Shadow, p. 171. 

5 The Voodoo equivalent of Saturn. 


Qulielfi 241 

initiations on each of the secret pathways’. 6 

Charles Stansfeld Jones (Frater Achad), who ‘jumped’ 
from Yesod to Binah by what he termed ‘an unusual 
method’, 7 had recourse to the secret paths alluded to by 
Bertiaux. The deeper significance of Achad’s magical leap 
from Yesod to Binah is resumed by the formula of the leapers 
as it applies to the tunnel of Qulielfi. 

Frater Achad attained a profound insight into the nature 
of the Abyss through his initiation into the backward paths of 
the Tree. It was Achad who announced the onset of the Aeon 
of Maat 8 with its formula of the Daughter as a balance to the 
present Aeon of Horns, typified by Ra-Hoor-Khuit, the Aeon 
of the Son. Ma-Ion 9 is the Aeon of M.A.A.T., ‘that is being 
interpreted the Master of the Temple of A.'.A.'.’ 10 Achad 
had become a Master of the Temple by jumping from Yesod 
to Binah. He notes that ‘this had to do with the Covenant of 
ST, or Set, proclaimed by Aleister Crowley’. 11 

Ma-Ion suggests, by metathesis, the Mo or Mv Ayon 12 
hinted at by Michael Bertiaux in his Fourth Year Grade 
Papers. 13 Achad approached very nearly to this Dark Doc¬ 
trine when he examined Liber Al in the light of his sudden 
accession to the grade of M.A.A.T. Instead of interpreting the 
doctrine in the light of the secret gnosis of Daath, he per¬ 
mitted his personal hatred of Crowley to distort his vision, as 
evidenced by the following comments on the key characters 
of The Book of the Law: 

6 Grade Papers of the Monastery of the Seven Rays, by Michael Bertiaux (4th. 
Year Course). 

7 See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 8. 

8 See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 8. 

9 This was Frater Achad’s name for the Aeon of Maat. 

10 Liber CCCLXX. See Magick, page 496. 

1 Unpublished Letters of Frater Achad. First Series, p. 56. 

1 2 The ‘Dark Doctrine’. 

13 In a Supplementary Paper edited by Michael Bertiaux in 1975 appears this 
illuminating statement: ‘Will — magical and totally irrational will — power, Le. 
free of “rational and static repression” - is the doorway to Universe "B”.’ Thus, 
the magical will and the true will are identical, and if one is the ‘doorway to 
Universe B’, so also is the other. It will be seen that this equation has vitally 
important and far reaching implications, for magick is the apotheosis of the 
irrational and - as such - in its profoundest sense it is the key to the Dark 
Doctrine (Mo Ayin). 



242 Nightside of Eden 

The so-called Goddess Nuit is, when understood at her true value, 
the Aetherial Realm of Nature, the lowest plane of the universe, 
without trace of consciousness, and characterized chiefly by Space, 
masquerading as Infinity and the Queen of Heaven. 

Ra-Hoor-Khuit, the child of the false union of the human soul and 
the void is really the Zeitgeist - the Time-Spirit, as opposed to the 
Spirit of Eternal Truth — that which perpetually denies, and is 
falsity itself; masquerading as the Lord of the Universe — God. 

The joke upon humanity, if such it may be called, is that Nuit (by 
means of the ‘voice’ and ‘personality’ given her by Aiwass and 666) 
sugar-coats the process of dissolution by crying unto men: ‘Come 
unto me!’ Thus luring them, not to the Highest, as might be ex¬ 
pected, but to the lowest and most negative realm of the universe, 
the brink of the Black Abyss. [The Universe ‘B’ phase of 
Bertiaux’s equation]. 

‘Hadit’, on the other hand, masquerading as the Lord and Giver of 
Life (the Knowledge of which is admittedly death [Daath, as 
explained in Part I] supplies the negative ideas that will, if accepted 
and acted upon, aid the soul in this process of self-destruction and 
final dissolution. 

‘Ra-Hoor-Khuit’, in the Abyss, awaits the victims of this process 
with his promised Vengeance, which, in the meanwhile, is threatened 
against all those ‘dogs’ of Reason who might turn (towards the real 
Truth or think of exposing the illusion and error of this ‘New Aeon’ 
system. 14 

Yet this is precisely the Path that the New Aeon has come 
to prepare, the path that will achieve its apotheosis in the 
Aeon of Ma Ion ls when the Ma Ay on, or Dark Doctrine 
(of Daath) becomes the formula of attainment. 

Mo Ayon or Aion = 891, which is the number of Uranos 
(Heaven). Uranus, the planet, is assigned to Daath as if to 
assert the identity of Heaven with the Place of the Abyss on 
the nightside of Eden. 8 + 9 + 1 = XVIII, Cheth, the Great 
Work symbolized by the Graal of Babalon. 16 The number 
XVIII reduces to 9, which is that of the lunar current and of 
Yesod, the Place of the Secret-ion that Achad failed to 

•^Unpublished letters of Frater Achad; 1st. series, p. 65. 

1 s te. of the Daughter; the Back of the Tree. 

16 See remarks on Tunnel 18. 


Qulielfi 243 

find. 17 Yesod is the equivalent of Daath on a denser level of 
awareness. It is the centre of the psychosexual dynamics 
ji connected with the magick of the O.T.O. But the most 

startling gematria of Mo aion is obtained when it is taken 
as Mu Aion, 177, for this is the number of Gan Eden, the 
Garden of Eden, the ‘lost’paradise. Mv = 46; Aion = 131; 
total, 177. The importance of these numbers has already 
been remarked. 131 is the number of Samael (i.e. Satan), 
the Guardian on the Threshold, and of Pan, Baphomet, and 
Mako (Set), the son of Typhon. Eliphas Levi describes the 
number 46 (Mv) as ‘the Key of the Mysteries’. Mv is semen; 
from the Egyptian word mai, male seed. It is also the word 
for ‘water’, the first ancestral essence that was primarily 
feminine. 131 (Satan) added to 535 ( Kteis ) yields 666, the 
number of the Great Beast of the City of Choronzon which 
is in the Abyss. Thus, the Dark Doctrine of Daath is of the 
Aeon of Maat whose mystery — as Frater Achad realized — 
‘had to do with the Covenant of Set’. 

It may now be understood in which sense the tunnel of 
Qulielfi is equated with the Magic Mirror, the ‘twilight of 
the place’, for the moon that illumines this tunnel is of 
Daath, not of Yesod. Hence, in Liber CCXXXI we read: 

By her spells she invoked the Scarab, the Lord Kheph-Ra, so that the 
waters were cloven and the illusion of the towers was destroyed. 
Khep-Ra is literally the backside of Ra (the Sun), i.e. the 
Moon. The waters refer to Mv, the water of the Abyss. The 
towers are those of the Black or Dark Brothers. This points 
to a mystery concerning the true meaning of Black Magic, 
for the Dark Doctrine is that of the Dark Brothers who 
appear upon earth (i.e. on the hither side of the Tree of Life) 
as Black Magicians. Crowley, it seems, was unaware of this 
signification otherwise, he would not have referred dero- 
gatively to Austin Spare as a ‘Black Magician’, which Spare 
assuredly was in the sense just explained, for he was an 
initiate of the Dark Doctrine. 

Frater Achad himself approached very nearly to an under- 

1 7 See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 8. 



244 Nightside of Eden 

standing of this mystery of true Black Magic, but, like many 
occultists before and after him, he was blinded by assuming 
that Universe ‘B’ is ‘evil’ whereas it is — like Satan — merely 
the adversary of the sense of individuality that is generated 
in man by illusory egoidal consciousness. In Universe ‘B’ 
occurs the ‘dissolution ... in the kisses of Nu’ (i.e. the waters 
of the Abyss) that Hadit promises in AL. II. 44. 18 This also 
explains the nature of the qliphoth, the Nashimiron or 
‘malignant women’ that are said to haunt the tunnel of 
Qulielfi. 

Finally, the symbolism of the leaper typified by Hekt, 
the frog-headed goddess of the voltiguers of the backward 
paths, is emphasized by the ascription to this kala 29 of the 
Mangrove, the swamp-tree haunted by frogs and other 
members of the batrachia. Lovecraft has alluded to these 
creatures as those that foregather in the proximity of the 
Great Old Ones or their minions. Their croakings herald the 
emergence from Universe ‘B’ of the Forces of ‘evil’ which 
are - more precisely speaking - the true powers of darkness, or 
non-being. The mangrove is thus the Tree of Death typical of 
the ‘other side’ of the Tree of Life. 

18 Note the number of this verse, 44, which is the number of blood (IM). 


20 

Raflifu 


THE 30th tunnel is under the aegis of 
Raflifu whose name should be vibrated 
mellifluously in the key of ‘D’. His sigil is 
to be painted in rayed red upon an amber 
disc. 

The kala filtering through this tunnel is 
of a solar nature. In the infernal tube of Raflifu this becomes 
blackened rather like a deep shadow cast in bright sunlight. 

The number of Raflifu, 406, is that of the letter Tau spelt 
in full, or ‘extended’. The mystical Tau, or Sign of the Cross, 
became an emblem of the god of the dead because the Cross 
symbolizes the crossing over from being to non-being. It is 
the special emblem of Shaitan, the Chaldean form of Set. The 
identity of Osiris, god of the dead, and Set, the Black Sun, 
is substantiated in the symbol of the Tau. 406 is the number 
of the Hebrew word AThH, meaning ‘thou’ as in Do what 
thou wilt in the Cult of Thelema. ‘Do what thou wilt’ is an 
exhortation to the sun or spirit in the blackness of Amenta, 
i.e. the subconsciousness. It is an invocation of the True Will 
and of that spontaneity which is the supreme state of con¬ 
sciousness described by Wei Wu Wei as ‘non-volitional living’. 1 

AThH ( Ateh ) is one aspect of the triple deity AHA, which 

1 See All Else is Bondage, and other works by Wei Wu Wei. 



1 


246 Nightside of Eden 

comprises Ani (I), Hua (He), Ateh (Thou); three facets of a 
deity worshipped in three persons and in three ways: 1) with 
averted face, 2) with prostration, and 3) with identification. 
The initials AHA add up to 7, the number of the Stellar 
Goddess whose symbol — in this context — is the glyph of a 
sexual formula consisting also of three aspects: 1) p.v.n. 2 
(with averted face); 2) cunnilinctus (with prostration); and, 
3) normal coitus (with identification). 

The above is substantiated, qabalistically, by the fact that 
the number of Raflifu is the result of adding together the 
series of numbers from 1-28, which connects it with the lunar 
cycle. 

406 is the number of QVSh, meaning a ‘bow’, from the 
Egyptian word Kesr, ‘an arrow’, the symbol of Sothis the 
Star of Set, which, again, indicates the XI° O.T.O. The bow 
and arrow are among the magical weapons ascribed to this 
kala. 406 is also the number of ShVQ, meaning ‘watereth’, 
‘overflow’, from the Egyptian sekh, ‘liquid’; and ShQV, 
‘drink’, from the Egyptian sheku, ‘drink’. ThV (also 406) 
means ‘desire’; and MOTzVR signifies ‘cohibitio’, ‘restraint’, 
‘withholding’, which suggests that a form of Karezza also 
pertains to this tunnel. These ideas refer to a libation, and 
the sexual nature of this drink-offering is confirmed by the 
corresponding text in Liber CCXXXI: 

Then did the sun appear unclouded, and the mouth of Asi was on 

the mouth of Asar 

This refers to the twins, Set Horns, embracing and becom¬ 
ing one with the Black Sun (Osiris or Shaitan), the God of 
the Crossing. 

The sigil of Raflifu exhibits the homed trident of Typhon 
(or Choronzon) flanked on either side by the axe or neter 
sign and surmounted by a black sun in the arms of a crescent 
moon. The horned trident is the triple deity whose formula 
has been explained above. The axe is the sign of deity. It is 

2 For details concerning p.v.n. (per ms nefandum), which comports the use of 
the XI° O.T.O., and therefore the Eye of Set, see Aleister Crowley & the Hidden 
God, pp. 107, 108. 


Raflifu 247 

the instrument of cleaving and is therefore of the Goddess, 
the Cleft One, who is neter ; that is, she is neither male nor 
female but neter (= neuter) for she is both male and female 
in a mystical sense that is indicible. 3 The axe sign is rep¬ 
resented by the Arabic figure of 7. Her planetary vehicle is 
Venus, one of whose names is AHA, whose number also is 
seven. 

The leopard is the animal sacred to this tunnel. The black 
and gold of its spots symbolize the sun in the darkness of 
Amenta; or, in magical terms, the sexual gold illuminating 
the subconsciousness with its lightnings. The hawk is the bird 
of the sun, golden in the upper air where it typifies Horns, 
black in the abyss where it typifies Set. 

The magical siddhi connected with the 30th Path is the 
Power of acquiring Wealth (gold), and of Preparing the Red 
Tincture. This symbolism combines the solar and lunar 
elements in one alchemical glyph. 

The disease typical of this kala of solar energy is depletion. 
The fetors of swamps and marshes are symbolic of the ‘sick’ 
sun in Amenta. 4 The qliphoth therefore haunt this tunnel in 
the form of will o’ the wisps or marsh gases that resemble 
the curious phosphorescences observed by sensitives over the 
graves of the dead. 

3 See Part I, chapter 2. 

4 For the meaning of the ‘sick’ sun? the sun in its feminine phase, see the works 
of Gerald Massey. 


#V 


Shalicu 


249 


21 

Shalicu 


THE 31st tunnel is under the dominion of 
Shalicu whose name should be vibrated 
in the key of ‘C’ in a sibilant and sinister 
whispering. His sigil should be painted in 
vermilion on an emerald ground. 

The triple tongue of flame (shin) is 
attributed to Path 31, and this is reflected into the abyss in 
the form of the inverted trident of Chozzar (a form of 
Choronzon and an emblem of Atlantean magick). 

This is the path of Evocation and Pyromancy via the 
secret fire-tongue that manifests in the tunnel of Shalicu in 
the form of Choronzon. As it is written in the grimoire: 






Then also the Pyramid was builded so that the Initiation might be 
complete. 1 

The number of Shalicu is 500 which is the number of ShR, 
meaning ‘Prince’, SORAH, ‘principal’, from the Egyptian Ser, 
‘chief’ or ‘head’, whence the English ‘sir’. Shalicu is the 
prince of the qliphoth in his form of the arch-devil Choron¬ 
zon who reigns within this tunnel and who conveys the most 
secret kala, which is known as The Aeon. This kala flows 
from the power-zone of Mercury to that of the earth. This 
tunnel is therefore of prime importance in that it extends to 
earth the Choronzonic vibrations of Daath, via Mercury. 

'Liber CCXXXI. 


ThNN, ‘to extend’, also has the number 500. The attribu¬ 
tion is confirmed by ThNIM (also equivalent to 500), 
meaning ‘wild beasts of the desert’. ThNIM approximates to 
the Egyptian word tenemi, which means ‘make to recoil’. 
The denizens of this tunnel are the ravenous beasts of the 
Desert of Set, and they repulse all efforts to gain access to 
the pylon of Daath. 

500 is also the number of MThNI, ‘the loins’, which has 
affinities with the Sanskrit word maithuna, signifying ‘coup¬ 
ling’, ‘sexual congress’. 

The fire of this path is the fire of Set which is the sexual 
heat typified by the beasts that lurk on the threshold of 
Daath before the Veil of the Abyss. The Pyre or Pyramid, 
and the Fire, jure identical; hence the pyramid as a symbol of 
Set and of the Star Sothis. 

The gods attributed to the 31st kala are Vulcan and 
Pluto; twin aspects of Hades (its fiery and its dark aspects 
respectively). Pluto is a form of the Cerberus or dog-headed 
beast that guards the Gates of the Abyss. 

The sigil of Shalicu shows the tomb of Christian Rosen- 
creutz, or, more precisely, the plaque that announces the fact 
of death, judgement, and resurrection. These comprise the 
three-fold formula of Crossing the Abyss via the crucifixion 
or passage from life to death. The idea of judgement, implicit 
in the old aeon cults, denotes the purgation and refinement 
of the gross body (the mummy) and its preparation for the 
crossing over to Amenta. This is adumbrated in the 
alchemical formula of the Black Dragon which symbolizes 
the appearance of the First Matter (Being) in its corrupt or 
unregenerate state (ego), prior to its projection as the Ulti¬ 
mate Kala (medicine). 

In the mysteries of the Golden Dawn this formula was 
expressed by the rituals of the 0° = 0° and 5° = 6 D Grades; 
the first adumbration — from the point of view of earth 
dwellers (Malkuth) — of ultimate Non-Being proceeding 
through the power-zone of Hod (Mercury) into Malkuth 
(Earth). 





Shalicu 


250 Nightside of Eden 

The magical siddhi of Path 31 is Transformation, Invisi¬ 
bility, or Dis-appearance; the disappearance of the world of 
appearances (i.e. the noumenalisation of phenomena which, 
interpreted in terms of objective existence, is the transfor¬ 
mation of the gross body into its ethereal essence). 

The ‘typical disease’ ascribed to Path 31 is Fever, which is 
associated with heat or fire and which culminates in the 
tunnel of Shalicu as Death and/or Full Insanity. 

The African pantheon related to this kala includes the 
fiery aspects of deity such as Manamana (lightning); Orun- 
apadi, the furnace equivalent to the Christian concept of hell; 
and Egungun, the Last Judgement. It is interesting to note 
that The Last Judgement was the title given to the Tarot 
Trump which showed the dead rising from their tombs. The 
symbolism of this trump, revised in accordance with New 
Aeon doctrine, is now entitled The Aeon, and it is in the 
form of the Child that the resurrected spirit arises from the 
darkness of Amenta. The great mystery is, however, that this 
child is feminine: the daughter, not the son. She is shadowed 
forth in the imagery of the fabulous bird, TzITzISH, which 
denotes the feathered or fledged bird (i.e. the pubescent 
female), the bird of qabalistic legend. Its number is 500. It 
is the ultimate symbol of the Aeon of Maat as adumbrated in 
the Dark Doctrine of Ma Ay on. 

Concerning this Doctrine, which is of paramount impor¬ 
tance, Michael Bertiaux observes: 

In the Druid metaphysics, which is more ancient than the Celtic 
religion .. . the study of Universe ‘A’ [the known universe] is called 
‘ontology’, or the science of being, while the study of Universe ‘B’ 
[the Meon, or unknown universe] could only be called ‘meontology’, 
or the study of non-being. However, they [i.e. the Druids] do not 
develop this conception very well, out of fear of contacting the 
beings in the other universe.' 1 

According to ancient occult lore there is but one method 
of penetrating the mysteries of the Meon, and that is by a 
reversal of the magical invocations which one would normally 

Italics by present author. 


251 

use in connection with Universe ‘A’. Frater Achad in recent 
times used this formula of reversion in a qabalistic sense and 
it enabled him to unravel many mysteries in The Book of the 
Law. It yielded the magical key that Aleister Crowley had 
searched for in vain, yet Crowley had intuited the correct 
formula when he declared: ‘I recognize magick as concerned 
to reverse any existing order’. 3 

Michael Bertiaux has carried this idea a stage further than 
both Crowley and Achad. Bertiaux suggests that ‘Choronzon 
might be thought of as one of the approaches to Universe ‘B’. 

It may, indeed, have been through this tunnel to the ‘other 
side’ of the Tree that Crowley acquired the elements of ‘evil’ 
that were to wreck his work in the Outer and make his books 
abhorred by those who did not understand the singular 
connection between the two universes. Bertiaux explains this 
matter clearly: 

Evil does not exist in Universe ‘A’, and in Universe ‘B’ it does not exist. 
However, when there is a relationship between the two universes, 
there is the possibility of evil coming into the world, into Universe 
‘A’. That is why the magicians who work along the lines of seeking 
contact with Universe ‘B’ are sometimes in a situation where they 
convey the impression of being ‘Black Magicians’ or else of being 
‘dangerously evil’ or ‘perverse and unnatural’. 

Bertiaux goes on to say that Choronzon’s ‘evil quality 
exists solely in the fact that he exists between the two 
universes, ‘A’ and ‘B’, as a magical guardian . . .* 

The 31st Path is divided between the powers of Fire and 
Spirit, and the 32nd and final path is divided between the 
powers of Earth and Saturn. 

In the 31st tunnel the powers of Fire and Spirit resume the 
formula of the Fire Snake, which is that of Spirit/Matter in 
the macrocosm and Choronzon/Woman in the microcosm. In 
other words, the essential forces of darkness (matter) are 

3 The Magical Record of the Beast 666, p. 248. The supreme symbol of rever¬ 
sion is Typhon, the goddess who represents the Backward or Averse Way. See 
The Sirius Mystery (Temple) p. 71. 

4 Italics by present author. Michael Bertiaux, 3rd Year Course (Monastery of 
the Seven Rays). 



252 Nightside of Eden 

activated in the macrocosm by the element of Spirit, and in 
the microcosm they manifest in the woman who embodies the 
Fire Snake. 5 The mechanics of this formula have been 
explained in my Typhonian Trilogy. 6 

To this kala 31 the Red Poppy, Hibiscus, or China Rose, 
are attributed, for these flowers are symbolic of the Scarlet 
Woman — Babalon — who incarnates the cosmic energies of 
the Fire Snake. These are symbolised by the Fire Opal which 
exudes as a precious stone from her vulva, and by the Pyramid 
of Set, the cosmic phallic flame that consumes it utterly with 
its triple fire-tongue. 

s i.e. the initiated Priestess of the Beast, Shugal-Choronzon. 

6 See also Crowley’s explanation of the Formula of LAShTAL ( Magick , 
pp. 415-16). 


22 

Thantifaxath 



THE 32nd tunnel is under the aegis of Thantifaxath whose 
number is 1040 and whose name should be reverberated in 
the key of ‘B* sharp as if in the hollows of chthonian deeps. 
His sigil is to be painted on a black rectangle rayed with blue. 

1040 is the number of the Temenos (the precinct of a 
temple), and of Choros, which, according to The Canon 
(p. 195) was ‘a dance by which the earliest worshippers 
invoked the deity, moving with measured steps around the 
altar*. 

In this kala is resumed the entire range of macro- and 
microcosmic kolas. Sixteen kalas are allotted to the macro¬ 
cosm, and sixteen to the microcosm. The 32nd kala is, in a 
sense, the second sixteenth and as such pertains to Earth, 
typified by the altar. The sigil of Thantifaxath thus forms 
the earth or base of the entire series of kalas and the anode 
and cathode are linked or earthed to the Tau 1 that has its 
origin in the subconsciousness, thus: 

The sigil includes the geomantic figure of Acquisitio which 
is attributed to the number nine, and which, in this instance, 

1 Le. the phallic current. 




254 Nightside of Eden 


Thantifaxath 


255 


is informed by the fiery Sagittarius — hence the electrical 
nature of Thantifaxath and its earthing in the hidden 
chthonian cells. These are typified by the forces of restriction 
and incarceration symbolised by Saturn. 

The magical siddhis of this kala comprise Works of Male¬ 
diction and Death, and the sickle of Saturn — The Great One 
of the Night of Time — is the supreme emblem of this Tunnel 
which is the resort of ghouls and larvae of the pit lit by the 
and lurid phosphorescent glare of corpse candles. 

The Ash and Cypress, the Nightshade, the Elm, and the 
Yew, are the trees of darkness in whose shadows the tunnel 
disappears into the deepest cells of the earth. Yet this tunnel 
has affinities with the ocean of space through its association 
with Set, the child of the Goddess of the Seven Stars whose 
planetary vehicle is Saturn. 

Sebek, the crocodile, is the zoomorphic emblem of this 
tunnel, and Mako — a name of Set as the son of Typhon and 
the powers of darkness — is the secret deity of this nether¬ 
most cell. The God Terminus also belongs here, for this 
outpost of the cosmic system is truly the end of the cosmic 
vibrations which, from this point, return to their source in 
the stars. 

In the African complex of powers associated with the 
32nd kala are the Ogboni and the Egungun which typify the 
most dreaded occult organizations in the whole of Africa. 
It is here also, in the depth of earth as in the most outflung 
gulf of blackest space, that the Odun or African Sabbath is 
celebrated with the primal rites of the Elder Gods who serve 
the Great One of the Night of Time. The Zangbeto or ‘people 
of the night who come from the other side of the sea’ 2 also 
haunt this power-zone of finality and death. 

The disease typical of this kala is arteriosclerosis, the 
hardening of the*arteris that is the adjunct of senility and the 
onset of the final rigor. 

The works of this tunnel include incarceration or ‘tying up 
as a corpse’ in the swathings of eternity. This is the origin of 

2 i.e. from the depths of space beyond Saturn; Saturn is the Great Sea. 


a deadly form of sorcery which consists in imprisoning souls 
in space by a curious method that has been described by 
Michael Bertiaux. The prospective victims of this particular 
form of attack are placed — symbolically 3 — in a diamond¬ 
shaped figure: 

(Before the fold) 


To intensify their confinement, mentally you will fold the diamond 
into the triad, so that two persons will struggle to occupy each of 
the three remaining angles of this form, which each have enough 
magical space for only one person. This will cause their objective 
conflict as they fight to occupy the same psychic and mental situs 
... By this method many enemies have died of occult suffocation, 
because they have been cut off from cosmic vitality by means of the 
magical walls of innermost space. 4 

The 32nd Path transmits the astral energies of Yesod to 
the sphere of Malkuth thereby effecting the final ‘earthing’ 
of all the kalas and influences that have streamed through 
the tunnels from Pluto (kether) to Earth (Malkuth). But at 
this utmost and final earthing of the cosmic current a sudden 
reversal occurs; and this is the formula of Magick itself, that 
the Current having earthed itself in Malkuth 5 now turns back 
upon itself and streaks up the Tree to dissolve in its source in 
the transcosmic centres of energy represented by Kether. 

Thus ‘Malkuth is in Kether and Kether is in Malkuth, 
though after a different manner’. The Bride is celebrated in 
the final verse of Liber CCXXXI with the words: 

And in the heart of the Sphinx 6 danced the Lord Adonai, 7 in his 
garlands of roses and pearls making glad the concourse of things, yea 
making glad the concourse of things. 

3 i.e. in the form of sigils. See Images and Oracles of Austin Osman Spare for a 
method of sigil construction. 

4 Michael Bertiaux, Monastery of the Seven Rays Grade Papers, Fourth Year 
Course. Such forms of magical constraint may account for the frequent karmic 
recurrence of asthma and kindred respiratory diseases that afflict so many occultists. 
s Malkuth is The Bride of the creative power in Kether. 

6 The mystery of the identity of Kether and Malkuth or, in Eastern terms, of 
Nirvana and Sangsar. 

7 The Holy Guardian Angel of each individual. Crowley identifies Adonai 
with the Serpent Apep (Liber LXV, v. 57). 






Glossary 


(Note: Many of the following terms are defined with specific 
reference to the Typhonian Tradition). 

Af.: African term 
Eg.: Ancient Egyptian 
Gk.: Greek 
Gn.: Gnostic 

Heb.: Hebrew and/or Chaldean 
Skt.: Sanskrit 
Voo.: Voodoo 

A.'.A.'. (Argenteum Astrum) The teachings of the A.'.A.'., 
or Silver Star, derive from extra-terrestrial sources, viz. 
Sothis (Sirius), the Star of Set. See Sothis. 

A’abirion (Heb.): ‘The Clayey’. An Order of Qliphoth (q.v.) 

ascribed to the 22nd Tunnel. 

A ’ano’nin (Heb.): Sentinel of the 26th Tunnel. 

Aba-it (Eg.): A bee. A symbol of Sekhet (q.v.). 

Abrahadabra (Gn.): The supreme spell or formula of the 
Great Work (q.v.) as restored by Crowley. Its number is 418. 
Abyss: The great gulf or void that constitutes a solution de 
continuity between the phenomenal world of manifestation 
and its noumenal source, i.e. non-manifestation. 

Adam (Heb.): Man. The word means the ‘red earth or sub- 


Glossary 257 

stance’, blood being the basis of manifestation and there¬ 
fore of incarnation. 

Adimiron (Heb.): ‘The Bloody’. An Order of Qliphoth (q.v.) 
pertaining to the 16th Tunnel. 

Ado (Af.): ‘The City of Prostitution’, situated near Badagry 
(West Africa). Sacred to the primal goddess, Odudua (q.v.). 

Adonai (Heb.): Lord. Sometimes applied to the Holy Guard¬ 
ian Angel. * 

Afefe (Af.): God of wind or spirit. Later Apap or Apophis 
(q.v.). 

Agape (Gk.): Love. The word adds up to 93. It is one of the 
key words of the present Aeon. See Aiwass, and Thelema. 

Aidoneus (Gk.): A form of Adonai (q.v.). Aidoneus is also a 
form of Ad or Had (cf. Hades), the Chaldean form of Set, 
Lord of the Abyss or underworld. 

Aidowedo (Af.): The rainbow goddess. See Qesheth. 

Ain (Heb.): Nothing. The Void. In a symbolic sense, the Eye 
of the Void, for Ain or Ayin means ‘an eye’. 

Ain Soph Aur (Heb.): Limitless Light. The Void beyond the 
known Universe represented by the Tree of Life, of which 
Kether is the most remote outpost, is characterized by Ain 
soph aur. 

Aiwass (var. Aiwaz). The extra-terrestrial entity that trans¬ 
mitted The Book of the Law (AL) to Aleister Crowley in 
Cairo in 1904. A full account of the transaction appears 
in The Confessions of Aleister Crowley, and other of his 
writings. The number of Aiwass is 418, the number of the 
Great Work, while that of Aiwaz is 93 or thrice 31, the 
key number of The Book of the Law. (See Magical and 
Philosophical Commentaries on The Book of the Law.) 

Ajna chakra (Skt.): The occult centre of magical power 
situated in the region of the pineal gland, sometimes 
known as the ‘third eye’. There is a magical affinity 
between the ajna eye, the ayin eye, and the yoni ‘eye’. 
Ajna is the seat of magical vision, occult procreative power, 
and ecstasy. 

Akasha (Skt.): Spirit. Symbolized by a black egg. 




258 Nightside of Eden 

AL (Heb.): God; the definite article. 

AL: Abbreviated form of the title Liber AL vel Legis (The 
Book of the Law) communicated to Crowley by Aiwass, 
q.v. 

Aleph (Heb.): The number one, and the first letter of the 
Hebrew alphabet. Its shape resembles a swastika. 

Alim (Heb.): The elemental gods. 

Amenta (Eg.) The hidden (Amen) land ( ta ). The abode of the 
midnight sun, Khephra, q.v. In the microcosm, Amenta 
symbolizes the subconscious or dreaming mind. 

Amprodias (Heb.): Sentinel of the 11th Tunnel. 

Anansi (Af.): See Once. 

Aossic: Name of a Great Old One; an extra-terrestrial entity 
which, together with Aiwass, maintains a link with mun¬ 
dane consciousness through the O.T.O. (q.v.). It is the 
magical name of the present Head of that Order. See Part 
2, Chapter 3, of the present book. 

Apap (or Apep) (Eg.) The god Set in his ophidian form. His 
sigil is given on page 140. The Greek version of Apap is 
Apophis. It derives from the earlier Afefe (q.v.). 

Aquarius-. The 11th zodiacal sign symbolizes the twin streams 
of polarized life fluids It is ruled by Saturn, the 

planetary representative of Shaitan or Set whose influence 
is reflected into the terrestrial sphere via Aiwass. 

Assiah (Heb.): The material world. 

Ataviqier. A term used in the Black Snake Cult to denote a 
formula similar to that of Austin Spare’s Atavistic Resur¬ 
gence. (See The Magical Revival). 

Atmadarshan (Skt.): Vision (darshan) of the Real (.Atma , the 
true Self as distinct from the ego). 

Atum: (Eg): The red or setting sun. A symbol of the solar- 
phallic energy illuminating the darkness of Amenta, q.v. 

Aub (Heb.): See Ob. 

Aud (Heb.): See Od. 

Atziluth (Heb.): The archetypal or spiritual world. 

Ayin (Heb.): An Ey e.Ayin is the number 70,and denotes the 
‘secret’ eye of Set. It is a loaded term in the Draconian Cult. 


Glossary 259 

Aza (Gn.): ‘The evil mother of all demons’. 

Azoth: An alchemical term for the fluid. The combined 
essences of the fully polarized power-zones in the human 
male and female organisms. 

Ba (Eg.): Soul or spirit. 

Babalon (Heb.): The title of the Scarlet Woman or con¬ 
secrated priestess used in the rites of Draconian magick. 
Her number is 156, which is the number of shrines in the 
City of the Pyramids (q.v.). Babalon means, literally, the 
Gateway of the Sun, or solar-phallic power. But Babalon is 
not only the medium of the solar force, she is the inspirer 
of its energy. At the height of her Rite she becomes 
oracular and endowed with magical siddhis (powers). 

Baphomet (Gn.): The Octinomos or eightfold name of magick 
power which Crowley assumed as the Outer Head of the 
O.T.O. (q.v.) Baphomet was adored by the Templars in the 
form of a Head. That it had a feminine origin is shown by 
Gerald Massey who writes: ‘Mete was the Baphomet or 
mother of breath’. (Nat. Gen. II. 14.) According to Von 
Hammer, the formula of faith inscribed on a chalice 
belonging to the Templars is as follows: ‘Let Mete be 
exalted who causes all things to bud and blossom, it is our 
root; it is one and seven’, i.e. it is octinomos, the eightfold 
name. 

Baratchial (Heb.): Sentinel of the 12th Tunnel. 

Bath Kol (Heb.): ‘Daughter of the Voice*. A magical mode of 
oracular utterance which involves the lunar current. 

Behimiron (Heb.): ‘The Bestial’. An Order of Qliphoth (q.v.) 
pertaining to the 28th Tunnel. 

Beth (Heb.): The number two. Its similarity to our word 
‘both’ is significant. It means a ‘house’ and is typical of 
the womb which is the primal divider into two. 

Bhakta (Skt.): Devotee. One who follows the Path of Devo¬ 
tion to a particular deity or ideal. 

Binah (Heb.): The third cosmic power-zone or sephiroth. It 
is ascribed to Saturn, the planetary representative of Set. It 




260 


Nightside of Eden 

is also known as the City of the Pyramids (q.v.) and is the 
home of Babalon whose 156 shrines constitute the City. 
Binah means ‘understanding’, for this is the first power- 
zone beyond the Abyss and the first place on the Tree 
where true understanding can dawn. 

Black Snake: See Couleuvre Noire, La. 

Brahmarandhra chakra (Skt.): The eighth or highest micro- 
cosmic power-zone situated at the region of the cranial 
suture and typified, in images of the Buddha, by the top- 
knot. 

Bultu (Af.): Hyena. See Bultungin. 

Bultungin (Af.): ‘I transform myself into a hyena’. The word 
of power used by votaries of the Cult of the Spectral 
Hyena. See Kabultiloa. 

Cancer: The Crab. The zodiacal sign denoting — in the 
Draconian Cult — the oblique or sideways Path. It is a 
glyph of the Great Work (q.v.). 

Carfax (Voo): God of the Crossing, or the Crossroads. A 
form of Baron Samedhi, or Baron Cimitiere, Lord of the 
Underworld and of the Dead. In the Cult of Choronzon: 
the Lord of Daath (i.e. Death). 

Carre four, Maitre (Voo.): See Carfax. 

Chakras (Skt.): A lotus or wheel. Whirling vortices in the 
subtle anatomy of man which concentrate magical and 
mystical powers ( siddhis) when aroused and set in motion 
by the Fire Snake (q.v.) in its dynamic aspect. 

Champana (Af.): God of venereal diseases. A qliphotic reflex 
of the 14th kala. 

Chandrakala (Skt.): Lit. ‘moon-juice’ or moon medicine. The 
ultimate alchemical metal or medicine identified with 
the lunar current in its fullest manifestation. 

Chaos (Gn.): Its number is 156 which identifies it with 
Babalon (q.v.), who is one half of the Beast ( Therion ) 666. 
See Choronzon, and Shugal. Chaos is the ultimate sub¬ 
stance of antimatter. 

Characith (Heb.): Sentinel of the 18th Tunnel. 


Glossary 261 

Cheth (Heb.): The number eight. Cheth means a ‘fence’, 
‘wall’, or ‘veil’, i.e the veil of the virgin. See Koth ; also 
Paroketh. 

Chit (Skt.): Consciousness. 

Chittam (Skt.): Mind-stuff. 

Chit-jada-granthi (Skt.): The subtle knot or complex at which 

, sentience identifies itself with insentience and thus appears 
to create an autonomous entity, or conscious subject, 
having the ‘world’ as its object. Chit-jada-granthi is there¬ 
fore the point at which the illusion of an ego, or separate 
self arises. 

Chokmah (Heb.): The second cosmic power-zone. The abode 
of the Magus, as Binah is the abode of the Priestess. 
Chokmah is the power-zone associated with the ‘forbidden’ 
or ‘hidden’ Wisdom, which is the meaning of the word 
Chokmah. 

Choronzon: One half or aspect of the The Beast 666, the 
Guardian on the threshold of the unknown Universe, or 
Universe ‘B\ The number of Choronzon is 333. It is thus 
the feminine half of the Beast, whose other half is the 
desert howler, Shugal (q.v.). Choronzon is probably a 
corrupt form of Chozzar, q.v. 

Chozzar: Lit. ‘a pig’. The pig is one of the typhonian tera¬ 
tomas, or symbols of Set. The symbol of Chozzar resembles 
the triple prong of Neptune, which is the name by which 
Chozzar is known to the uninitiated. He was, according to 
Blavatsky, the God of Atlantean Magic. 

City of the Pyramids: A designation of Binah, the third 
sephira, on account of its being the abode of Babalon 
whose 156 shrines comprise the City. 

Coph Nia: A cypher used in AL. It denotes the secret or 
reverse eye (nia) of the daughter (Coph). See Koph. 

-.C ouleu vre Noire, La: Th e Black Snake is the name of a 
nioctern Voodoo cult working with the Ophidian Current 
and directed by Michael Bertiaux. See Cults of the Shadow. 

Couleuvre Rouge, La: The Red or Scarlet Snake is a form of 
the Fire Snake, q.v. 





262 Nightside of Eden 

Cynocephalus: The dog-headed ape or sacred baboon of 
ancient Egypt. See Kaf-Ape. 

Dadth (Heb.): The eleventh cosmic power-zone; sometimes 
csilled the ‘false’ sephira. Daath is the gateway to the ‘other’ 
world - Universe ‘B’ - sentinelled by the Beast 666 
(Shugal-Choronzon), hence its association with death as 
the formula of transition from the phenomenal world of 
appearance to its source in noumenon; the absence of the 
apparent and the presence of the real. 

Dagdagiel (Heb.): Sentinel of the 14th Tunnel. 

Dagdagiron (Heb.): ‘The Fishy’. An Order of Qliphoth (q.v.) 
pertaining to the 26th Tunnel. 

Daleth (Heb.): The number 4. This letter is attributed to 
Venus as the door ( Daleth means a ‘door’) of all mani¬ 
fested life. 

Dangbe (Af.): A serpent god, and therefore a symbol of the 
Ophidian Current. 

Dark Doctrine, The-. See Mo Ay on. 

Darshan (Skt.): Vision, in the sense of direct or immediate 
perception of the noumenal base of phenomena. 

Death Posture: A term used in Zos Kia Cultus to indicate the 
god-form or mudra of Daath, whereby the world of 
appearances ceases and its noumenal source is revealed. 

Dogon: An African tribe that has recently been found to 
have had a ‘direct teachings’ transmission from the Star of 
Set (Sirius) which spans more than 10,000 years. (See 
Robert Temple’s The Sirius Mystery). 

Draco: The stellar representative of Chozzar, q.v. 

Draconian Tradition The Choronzonic Cult, or Cult of the 
Beast, that originated in the Ophidian Mysteries of Inner 
Africa and flowered in Egypt as the Stellar Mythos or 
Typhonian Tradition. 

Dukes of Edom: See Edom. 

Echu (var. Legba, q.v.). The fetish of the ‘knotted stick’, i.e. 
the phallus. Echu is the ‘rejected’; rejected, that is, by the 


Glossary 263 

non-initiate who is unable to understand the symbolism 
of the creative current. See Shu. 

Edom (Heb.): The Hebrew version of Turn oxAtum, the red 
or setting sun symbolic of the phallic force illuminating 
the underworld (subconsciousness), Amenta. The 11 
Dukes of Edom refer to the reflections of the cosmic 
power-zones, including Daath, in the subconsciousness of 
humanity. See Esau. 

Egungun (Af.): Lit. ‘bones of the dead’. 

Elixir Rubeus: The effluvium of Babalon, the Scarlet Woman, 
which is the menstruum of the lunar current. See Crowley’s 
Magical Record for accounts of workings involving this 
kala, which he abbreviates to El. Rub. 

Esau (Heb.): Another name for Edom. Esau means ‘red’. 
According to Kuhn ‘Tradition shows Esau imaged by the 
solar hawk, which symbolises blood’. The Kings of Edom 
therefore were Kings of the Red Land, or place of blood, 
hence their association with the idea of ‘unbalanced 
force’ typical of the Qliphoth. 

Fafnir Worm: The Norse equivalent of the African Afefe 
(q.v.) that became the Egyptian Apap or Apophis, the 
Ophidian form of Set. 

Fire Snake: The Kundalini. The primal shakti or power that 
is usually dormant in the non-initiate. She is embodied in 
and by the Scarlet (or fiery) Woman who awakens the 
solar-phallic force of the Magus and thereby inspires him 
with creative energy. 

Frog: The supreme totem and zootype of the Leapers of the 
Backward Paths or Tunnels of the Tree of Life. See Hecate, 
Hekt, and Voltigeurs. 

Gamaliel (Heb.): An Order of Qliphoth relating to Yesod, the 
power-zone of sexual magick. Its formula is that of the 
‘Obscene Woman’ whose zoormorphic symbol is the ass 
which the Templars were accused of worshipping. 

Gan Eden: The Garden of Eden which is the field of the inter- 





264 Nightside of Eden 

play of polarized cosmic and microcosmic forces inter¬ 
preted in terms of magical (i.e. sexual) energy. The number 
of Gan Eden is 177 which is that of Mu Aton (q.v.), the 
‘Dark Doctrine’ concerning the ‘other side’ of the Tree. 

Ganin-Gub: A serpent sacred to tl\e Hottentots. It is one of 
the zootypes assumed by the haunters of the 17th tunnel 
of Set. It also assumes the form of the Bultu or spectral 
hyena. 

Gargophias (heb.): Sentinel of the 13th Tunnel. 

Gematria (Heb.): A qabalistic system of interpretation where¬ 
by words having the same numerical value as other words 
are considered to be essentially identical. 

Gemini: The stellar representative of the Eros-Libido current 
symbolized by the Lovers, or Twins. 

Ghagiel (Heb.): ‘The Hinderers of God’. An Order of 
Qliphoth ascribed to the Masloth or Zodiac. 

Gimel (Heb.): The number 3. Gimel means a ‘camel’. Note 
the similarity to the English word camel. This creature is 
known as the ‘ship of the desert’, an apt symbol of the 
Priestess of the Silver Star (Set) who provides in herself 
the vehicle of transit across the desert of Set that lies 
beyond Daath. 

Granthi (Skt.): ‘knot’ or ‘complex’. See Chit-jada-granthi. 

Great Work, The: An alchemical term frequently used by 
Crowley to designate the uniting of the microcosm and 
macrocosm (the 5 and the 6), the Pentagram and the 
Hexagram in the elevenfold formula of Abrahadabra (q.v.), 
of which the heart or essence is Had (i.e. Set). SeeAleister 
Crowley&the Hidden God for a full explanation of this term. 

Guede-Nibho (Voo): A term used in the Cult of the Black 
Snake to denote the dual polarities, Ob and Od (q.v.). 

Hadit: The manifestation of Nuit’ (AL. I. i.), in the sense 
that the Child (Har, Homs) is the manifestation of the 
Mother. Hadit is the sun that illumines the dark, as the 
son illumines or fulfills the hidden potential of the mother, 
for without him She cannot be. 


Glossary 265 

Har (Eg.): Child. The Har (Greek, Horns) is the son of the 
mother (Typhon) and is therefore identical with Set. 
See Hadit. 

Harpocrates (Gk.): The Greek form of Hoor-paar-Kraat, the 
god of silence; the child (Har) who is silent in the sense of 
being latent in the womb of its mother, yet filled with all 
the potentiality of her being. 

Hathor (Eg.): Lit. the womb (hat) of the child (hor). Hathor 
was popularized as the goddess of love and sexual pleasure. 

He: The number 5 and therefore the number of the Woman 
par excellence. The two hes of Tetragrammaton (q.v.), 
IHVH, represent the Mother and the Daughter respectively. 

Hecate (Gk.): The Greek form of the Egyptian Hekt, the 
frog-headed goddess. She is one of the most important 
figures in the Draconian Cult, being symbolic of the Trans¬ 
former from watery or astral existence to earth or tangible 
being. She is also the symbol of the leapers who ‘jump’ the 
paths on the reverse side of the Tree. (See Voltigeurs). 
Hecate is equivalent to the number 100 which is qoph 
(q.v.), the glyph of sexual magick, and to koph, the 
daughter of the ‘secret’ eye. (See Coph Nia). 

Hemethterith (Heb.): Sentinel of the 15th Tunnel. 

Hem-ra-ha (Eg.): The Crowned and Conquering Child in his 
dual form of Ra-Hoor-Khuit (Horns) and Hoor-paar-Kraat 
(Set). 

Hes (Eg.): Isis. Her name means ‘seat’, the original founda¬ 
tion or fundament being the womb of the mother. 

Hod (Heb.): The name of the 8th cosmic power-zone or 
sephira which is attributed to Mercury. It is primarily the 
zone of mental magick. 

Hoor-paar-Kraat (Eg.): The god Set, the averse or other side 
of Horus or Ra-Hoor-Khuit (q.v.). 

Homs: The general name or designation of the solar-phallic 
child that is the symbol of manifestation. Set is the reverse 
of this concept; he represents the backward path, or the 
way back, to non-manifestation. 

Homs, Aeon of: A period of approximately 2,000 years 




266 Nightside of Eden 

during which the planet earth will be predominantly under 
the aegis of the energies typified by Horns, the god of 
manifestation and of the present period of materialism 
with its tendency to total materialisation. Crowley 
announced the advent of the Aeon of Horns in 1904 when 
he ‘received’ The Book of the Law (AL) from Aiwass, who 
described himself as the ‘minister of Hoor-paar-Rraat’, 
and who is thereby manifesting upon earth. 

Hriliu (Gn.): Metaphysical Ecstasy. It is symbolised in the 
microcosm by sexual orgasm. Hriliu is the ‘voice of the 
dove’ — the emblem of Typhon and of the Venusian 
element in humanity. 

Ife (Af.): The primal African goddess. The Eve of the Heb¬ 
rews. 

lie (At.): The earth. 

IPSOS: The Word of the goddess Maat. See Liber Pennae 
Praenumbra, transmitted via Gary Straw and Margaret 
Cook. 

Isis : The Greek form of the Egyptian goddess Hes who 
symbolises the base or foundation of life. 

Iyemoja (Af.): Lit. ‘The Mother of the Fish’, i.e. the source 
of the generative current, the fish being symbolic of the 
sexual principle in its feminine form. 

Jada (Skt.): Inert. Usually applied to the body, which is 
animated by consciousness and merely jada without it. 

Jagrat (Skt.): The state of wakeful or mundane conscious¬ 
ness. See Svapna, and Sushupti. 

Juggernaut : An Indian version of Yog-Nuit, the force that 
dissolves phenomenal existence and returns it to non¬ 
manifestation. 

Ka: (Eg.): The shadow or astral double. 

Kabultiloa: The African cult centre of the Bultu (q.v.) or 
Spectral Hyena. The name means, literally: The shadow 
(ka) of the spectre or spirit ( loa) of the hyena (bultu). 
See Part II, chapter 7. 


Glossary 267 

Kaf-Ape: The cynocephalus or sacred baboon. One of the 
earliest zootypes of the lunar current, for by its periodic 
emissions time was first measured. It later became asso¬ 
ciated with Thoth, a moon god and god of magick and of 
writing, for the Kaf-ape was the living prototype of the 
Word that ante-dated human speech. The symbolism of the 
Kaf-ape is highly charged and very complex; it is treated 
extensively in the Typhonian Trilogy. 

Kala (Skt.): Essences, principles, elements, flowers, perfumes, 
fragrances, medicines, metals, colours. The word has all 
these connotations and many more. In the Tantras, the 
kalas are divisions of Time, and have a very special conno¬ 
tation, being connected with the doctrine of the vaginal 
vibrations or effluvia of the female used in the sacred rites. 
These sure represented in the qabalah and the tarot by 
magical glyphs which it is the purpose of my books to 
explain. See the Typhonian Trilogy. 

Kalachakra (Skt.): The Wheel or Chakra that distils the 
Supreme or Mahakala, sometimes called the Chandrakala 
or moon-medicine. 

Kali: The Black Goddess of Time (Kala). Our word Calendar 
derives from her name. She is black because Time dissolves 
phenomenal existence back into non-manifestation. 

Kalinian Current: A term coined to denote the functions 
characteristic of Kali (q.v.). 

Kam (Eg.): Black. Its zootype is the crocodile, a symbol of 
Mako (a form of Set), the son of Typhon. 

Kaph: The eleventh letter of the Hebrew alphabet. It is a 
loaded term in the Draconian Cult where it is synonymous 
with Coph (Nia), Kaf (Ape), Qoph (Moon); all of which, 
see. 

Karezza: A sex-magical method whereby energy is built up 
by erotic stimulaton, retained, and directed to occult 
ends. It was advocated in the West by Thomas Lake Harris 
(1823-1906), who adapted it from certain Tantric 
techniques. 

Kartikeya (Skt.): The Hindu version of the earlier Egyptian 




268 Nightside of Eden 


Glossary 


269 


Har, Khar, or Khart, the Child begotten of fire and some¬ 
times equated with the planet Mars (Horus). His vehicle is 
the peacock which is the symbol of Shaitan or Set. 

Kaula Marg (Skt.): The Path or Way of those who invoke the 
kalas in the Kalachakra or Kaula Circle. 

Kether (Heb.): The first cosmic power-zone and the crown 
of the Tree of Life through which pour down the influences 
of the Ain or Void, i.e. the ‘other’ universe that is beyond 
or outside the known. 

Khabs (Eg.): A star. 

Khem (Eg.): Same as Kam (q.v.). Khem is a name applied to 
Egypt as the black or red land, and the anthropomorphic 
representation of this concept was ithyphallic. Primarily, 
however, the black or red Nilotic mud that literally formed 
Egypt, was identified symbolically with the red kala of 
the feminine fluid of manifestation. 

Khepr-ta (Eg.): The frog-headed god of earth, i.e. after the 
transformation from aqueous (i.e. astral) existence. A 
symbol of magical transformation and reification. 

Khepsh (Eg.): The thigh of the Goddess represented celes¬ 
tially by the stellar complex Ursa Major , the Great Bear(er), 
and terrestrially, by the female generative organ. See 
Sefekh. 

Khonsu (var. Khunsu) (Eg.): Lit: ‘Traveller of the night 
sky’ (i.e. the moon). He is associated with the Pig of 
Chozzar (q.v.) and is the original of Guede, or Ghede, of 
the Voodoo cults. 

Khu (Eg.): The original queue or tail of the Goddess was the 
seat of magical power, of which the khu was the later 
stylised form. 

Kia\ The ‘Atmospheric I’, or Cosmic Spirit. A term used in 
Zos Kia Cultus. Its symbol is the Ay in, or Eye, and it is the 
centre of magical vision. 

Koph; The daughter. See also Kaf-ape, Kaph, and Qoph. 

Koth : The Hollow One (i.e. the vulva). 

Kotha!: Thou Hollow One’. An invocation of the primal 
goddess that appears in an ancient Gnostic-coptic grimoire 


which Crowley restored and re-presented as Liber Samekh. 
See Magick, p. 358. 

Kronos (Gk.): A form of Saturn and therefore an embodi¬ 
ment of the idea of Time. The name is sometimes spelt 
Chronos and is perpetuated in the word ‘chronology’. 

Kronotypes : A term used by Gerald Massey to denote the 
celestial time-keepers, whether stars or planets. See Part 
1, chapter 10. 

Kundalini (Skt.): The magical power in man symbolized by a 
serpent having 314 coils which lies dormant at the base of 
the spine in the region of the Muladhara chakra. It is 
known to initiates, in whom it can be activated, as the 
Goddess of the Fire Snake. 

Kurgasiax (Heb.): Sentinel of the 21st Tunnel. 


Lafcursiax (Heb.): Sentinel of the 22nd Tunnel. 

Lalita (Skt.): The sexual aspect of shakti, or power. The 
original symbol of this concept was, not the woman, but 
the sow, known in ancient Egypt as Rerit. The Great Sow 
or Sower became the Lalita of the Indian and the Lilith of 
Chaldean lore, where she appears as the Queen of Night 
and the prototype of the succubus or sexual vampire. 

Lam : An extra-terrestrial entity with whom Crowley estab¬ 
lished contact c.1919 and which, in more recent years has 
been contacted by Soror Tanith of the O.T.O., and by 
Michael Bertiaux of the Black Snake Cult ( Couleuvre 
Noire, La). A reproduction of Crowley’s portrait of Lam 
appears in The Magical Revival. 

Lamed (Heb.): The number 30. The complete lunar cycle 
consisting of two lunations of 15 days each. Lamed is 
ascribed to Venus because of the sexual nature of the lunar 
current. 

Langage (Voo.): A sacred tongue or language. 

Legba (Voo.): More correctly, AL-egba, the phallic deity of 
the Voodoo pantheon equivalent to the concept of Pern. 
Legba is also known as Ongogo Ogo, ‘the genius of the 




270 Nightside of Eden 

knotted stick’ (i.e. the phallus); and Eshu (cf. Shu), 
the ‘evil one’. See echu. 

Leo: The astrological glyph of Leo is in the form of the tail of 
a lioness. The tail or queue was the primal symbol of 
magical power (see Khepsh, khu) and that power was 
considered as feminine. The later cults, however, ascribed 
a solar-phallic origin to the power, and the lioness was 
transmogrified into the lion. 

Leviathan (Heb.): The old serpent ever seeking to penetrate 
into Paradise. In the Sepher Yetzirah, Leviathan is identi¬ 
fied with Theli, the dragon. MacGregor Mathers suggests 
Than, the root of serpent or dragon, as also the root of 
Leviathan. (See The Kabbalah Unveiled). 

Libra: The astrological sign of Libra is in the form of the 
double horizon, with the sun-disc rising or setting accord¬ 
ing as to whether the Spring or Autumn Equinox is implied. 
The letter Lamed (q.v.) is ascribed to Libra. Venus is its 
planetary representative and an indication of the nature 
of the formula whereby the two polarities (i.e. the two 
horizons) are perfectly balanced. 

Lilith (Heb.): Adam’s first wife was the astral image of desire 
that became the type of the succuba. She represents the 
visions of unsatisfied desire reflected into consciousness 
as the vivid and voluptuous imagery that later manifested 
in the flesh as Eve (woman). See Lalita. 

Linga (Skt.): The phallus. Its connection with the Word or 
Logos is implicit in such words as lingual, language, etc. 

LVX (Gn.): The Light of Consciousness. Its complement is 
NOX (q.v.). 

Lycanthropique, Mystere: A term used in the Black Snake 
Cult to denote a form of sorcery involving the use of the 
VIII°\ O.T.O. (See Part 2, chapter 9). 

Mahapralaya (Skt): Lit. ‘Great Dissolution’. The period of 
rest or withdrawal to non-manifestation that occurs after 
the projection of phenomenal existence has gone its round 
of seven cycles or aeons. 


Glossary 271 

Mahapurusha (Skt.): A gigantic form radiant with light. A 
deva or shining one. 

Ma-Ion: A term coined by Frater Achad to denote the Aeon 
of Maat. See Cults of the Shadow, chapter 8. 

Ma-Kheru (Eg.): ‘The true voice’. A term signifying the 
function of the god Hormakhu who represents the precise 
articulation of the Word or Logos which manifests at 
puberty. The true voice is thus of a creative nature and the 
vehicle of the Word of Power. 

Mako: The son of Typhon (and therefore a form of Set), 
typified by the crocodile. See Kam. 

Malkunofat (Heb.): Sentinel of the 23rd Tunnel. 

Malkuth (Heb.): ‘The bride’. The tenth power-zone, typified 
by the daughter. SeeKoth; Malkuth orMalkoth is the power- 
zone connected with the total manifestation of matter. 

Manamana (Af.): Lightning. 

Marassas (Voo.): The twins. Gemini is the astrological glyph 
of this concept, which is of vital importance in the 
Draconian Cult. The twins, or lovers, typify the fully 
polarised aspect of shakti (power). Hence they are rep¬ 
resented by the Sword. See Zain. 

Masloth (Heb.): The Sphere of the Fixed Stars. A name given 
to the second cosmic power-zone, Chokmah, the realm of 
the Magus. 

Meon: A term used by votaries of the Black Snake Cult to 
denote the ‘other’ or unknown Universe, i.e. Universe ‘B\ 

Metatron (Heb.): The angel olBriah (q.v.). 

Mirroir Fantastique: A reflection, in terms of the Meon 
(q.v.), of Universe ‘A’ (i.e. the known universe). 

Mo Ay on: A term used by Black Snake Cultists to denote the 
Dark Doctrine, or the Doctrine of the Dark Side of the Tree. 

Mu Aion: A variant spelling of Mo Ay on (q.v.). Its number, 
177, is that of Gan Eden (the Garden of Eden), thus 
indicating the concern of the Dark Doctrine with the 
nightside of Eden. (See Part 2, chapter 19). 

Mu: The vulture’s cry. Its number, 46, is the Key of the 
Mysteries. (See Part 1, chapter 11). 




272 Nigh tside o f Eden 

Mudra (Skt.): Gesture; also a seal, in the sense of magical 
passes or gestures of the hand that concentrate power in 
specific centres of the body. 

Muladhara chakra (Skt): Lit. Root chakra. The power-zone at 
the base of the spine; the abode of the Fire Snake (q.v.). 

Narcissus : The myth of Narcissus has a particular reference to 
the formula of the VIH° O.T.O. (See Part 2, chapter 9). 

Nashimiron (Heb.); ‘The Snaky’. An Order of Qliphoth per¬ 
taining to the 25 th Tunnel. 

Nechastheron (Heb.): ‘The Brazen Serpents’. An Order of 
Qliphoth pertaining to the 24th Tunnel. 

Nephilim (Heb.): Giants, Fallen Ones, Abortions. They were 
glyphed by the Ape. In a mystical sense they are the 
mahapurusas (q.v.) that ‘fell through’ the window in space 
typified by Daath and spawned the Typhonian teratomas 
described by Berosus in his account of Creation. (See Part 
1, chapters 8 and 9). 

Neptune: See Chozzar-, also, No dens. 

Neter (Eg.): The neter-sign or axe is a symbol of divinity as 
the cleaver into two. As such, it was originally a symbol of 
the Mother and her child, the latter being neter or neuter, 
i.e. neither male nor female, but having the potential of 
either. The axe as a figure of 7 is the symbol also of Set, 
whose name means seven. This figure of seven was attri¬ 
buted also to Venus, the planetary representative of the 
primordial mother whose original form was the thigh 
constellation in ‘heaven’, and the woman’s womb upon 
earth. 

Netzach (Heb.): The seventh cosmic power-zone or sephira 
to which is ascribed the Goddess Venus. 

Niantiel (Heb.): Sentinel of the 24th Tunnel. 

Nibho (Voo.): Lord. 

Nirvana (Skt.): The interdependent counterpart of Samsara 
(q.v.). When the phenomenal world is dissolved in and by 
the mind of the Initiate, the result is Nirvana. 

Nodens: A form of Neptune as God of the Deep, i.e. Amenta 


Glossary 273 

(q.v.). Nodens is a form of Chozzar, whose symbol is the 
trident or triple-tongued fire of Shin (or Sin) the letter of 
Set. 

NOX (Gn.)- Night. A name of Nuit and the Key of the Abyss. 
A formula of dissolution that contains the Mark of the 
Beast. See Crowley’s Comment to Liber VII, published in 
the Magazine, Mezla (No. 4). 

Nu-Isis : That aspect of Nuit or Nox (q.v.) that radiates dark¬ 
ness from the transplutonic power-zone sacred to Set or 
Shaitan. See Aleister Crowley & the Hidden God, chapter 
10 . 

Nuit: ‘infinite Space, and the infinite Stars thereof’. Nuit’s 
definition of herself in AL (chapter 1, verse 22). As will 
be seen, her definition contains, hidden within it, the 
name ISIS’ 

Ob (Voo.): A serpent. The root of the word Obeah, the 
Ophidian Current. Its number, 9, identifies it with the 
lunar power-zone, Yesod, and the magick of the Yezidi. 

Obeah (Voo.): See Ob. The spider is the supreme zootype of 
this cult. 

Ochose (Af.): Lit. ‘The hunter in moonlight’, which identifies 
this deity with Khonsu (q.v.). 

Octinomos (Gn.): The Eightfold Name and therefore the 
height or summit of attainment. According to Crowley, 
Baphomet was the eightfold name, and the summit or 
Head of this Beast was adored by the Templars. Hence 
Crowley chose the name Baphomet on acceding to the 
headship of the O.T.O. 

Od (Voo.): The Magical Light. Od is the positive form of Ob 
(q.v.). Its number, 11, identifies it with the light of Daath 
(or death), and therefore with the formula of magick or 
‘energy tending to change’. 

Odn (Heb.): Eden. The field of electro-magnetic force that 
is the playground of the Fire Snake (q.v.). 

Odudua (Af.): The African original of the Od or Odic Force. 
She is the primal goddess of the African pantheon. Her 



274 Nightside of Eden 

cult centre is Ado (q.v.), near Badagry, West Africa. On the 
Tree of Life Odudua equates with Binah, the power-zone 
associated with the Scarlet Woman, Babalon. 

Odun (Af.): The African original of the Witches’ Sabbath. 
Odun means ‘the Year’ and symbolises the fulfilment of 
a cycle of time. It is thus the glyph of the full moon and 
of the Goddess Fifteen. 

Ogboni (Af.): The secret or underground network of kalas 
represented by the Tunnels of Set. 

Ogoun (Af.): The African original of the fifth cosmic power- 
zone represented by the planet Mars. The African version 
of Horus. 

Ombos: The ancient cult centre of Set in southern Egypt; 
seat of the shrine of Sevekh-Ra, the crocodile or dragon¬ 
headed deity of the dark dynasties. (See The Magical 
Revival, chapter 3). 

Once (var. Anansi) (Af.): The spider. Supreme symbol of 
the Obeah Cult. 

Ophidian Current: The Draconian tradition of Apap or 
Apophis, the primal serpent typical of the Goddess in her 
dual aspect, viz: la Couleuvre Noire and la Couleuvre 
Rouge, or Apophis and the Fire Snake. 

Or do Templi Orientis (O.T.O.): Ihe Order of the Temple 
of the East. In the macrocosm, the east is the place of the 
rising sun. This is represented in the microcosm by the 
rising phallus, a symbol of the sexual magick practised by 
initiates of the Order. (See Part 2, chapter 6; see also The 
Magical Revival, for historical facts concerning the O.T.O.). 

Orungan (Af.): The African original of the Holy Ghost, geist, 
or gust; the breath of spirit that impregnates and thereby 
sanctifies. See Ruach. 

O.T.O. See Ordo Templi Orientis. 

Pan: The Greek god whose zoormorphic symbol is the Goat 
and whose sacred number is Ayin, q.v. In a cosmic sense, 
Pan is The All. 

Parfaxitas (Heb.): Sentinel of the 27th Tunnel. 


Glossary 275 

Paroketh, Veil of (Heb.): On the Tree of Life, Paroketh is the 
veil between the higher and lower triads. See Cheth, and 
Koth. 

Peacock: Sacred to the Yezidi and to the Cult of Shaitan. 
The multi-eyed tail is symbolic of the faculty of astral 
vision and dream-control which is brought into play in 
the entranced priestess during the secret rites. (See Aleister 
Crowley & the Hidden God, chapter 7). 

Pe (Heb.): The number 80, attributed to the Tower (in the 
Tarot). Pe means a ‘mouth’. The mouth and the tower are 
two of the major symbols connected with the Cult of 
Maat. (See Liber Pennae Praenumbra). 

Petro Rites (Voo.): The Voodoo equivalent of the left- 
handed Tantras. 

Pluto: The planet whose totem is the dog, guide of the dead 
in the underworld, or world beyond the universe. Pluto is 
ascribed to Kether, the outer-most (and, by reflection, also 
the innermost) Pylon of the Tree. 

Qatesh : The naked goddess who carries flowers and a serpent 
(see kalas). She is mounted upon a lion. Qatesh is an 
Asiatic version of Babalon straddling the Beast. On an 
Egyptian stele, Qatesh is called Kent or Kunt. The lion and 
the serpent symbolism shows her to be an embodiment of 
the formula, love under will. 

Qadosh (Heb.): Holy, primeval, ancient. A form of the name 
Qatesh (q.v.) which explains the sexual nature of the 
primal Mysteries. 

Qesheth (Heb.): A rainbow. See Aleister Crowley & the 
Hidden God, chapter 7 for a full explanation of this 
symbol. The rainbow is associated with the alchemical 
formula of regeneration through putrefaction. 

Qliphoth (Heb.): The plural form of qlipha, meaning ‘an 
harlot’ or ‘strange woman’; terms which signify ‘otherness’. 
The shadowy world of shells or reflections. Each sephira of 
the Tree of Life has its corresponding qlipha, which is 
the reflection of the energy which it represents, and these 



276 Nightisde of Eden 

averse power-zones — or qliphoth — form the Tree of 
Death. 

Qoph (Heb.): The number 100, which is also that of Hecate 
(q.v.), goddess of sorcery. Qoph is also the daughter, Koph 
(q.v.), mentioned in AL, whose secret ‘eye* (Nia) is the 
gateway to Universe ‘B\ Qoph means the ‘back of the 
head 5 (cerebellum), where ‘the creative or reproductive 
force is primarily situated’. ( Magick , p. 183). 

Raflifu (Heb.): Sentinel of the 30th Tunnel. 

Ra-Hoor-Khuit (Eg.): The God Horns as the Child of Light 
whose shadow is his dark twin, Set (q.v.). 

Rainbow. See Qesheth. 

Rerit (Eg.): See Lalita, Lilith. 

RPSTOVAL: The 8-lettered cypher that appears in Liber AL. 
(See Part 1, chapter 11). 

Ruach (Heb.): Spirit. The Egyptian root of Ruach is Ru, the 
emaning mouth or womb, thus showing that the nature of 
Spirit was originally conceived of as feminine, and ascribed 
to water, or blood. In later times, Ruach was given a 
masculine connotation and assigned to air as the wind or 
breath of creative spirit, hence the gust or ghost that 
became the Holy Ghost symbolized by the dove, the beast 
of the air. In yet later phases of its symbolisms, the Ruach 
came to be identified with the Reason. 

Sahasrara chakra (Skt.): The 1000-petalled lotus which is the 
eighth and therefore the height, in terms of exaltation 
and potency, of the microcosmic power-zones. It over¬ 
shadows man in the sense that the Ain overshadows the 
cosmic power-zones represented by the Tree of Life. 

Saksaksalim (Heb.): Sentinel of the 25th Tunnel. 

Samadhi (Skt.): Lit. ‘Together with the Lord’. A state of 
thought-free consciousness characterized by bliss. There 
are several forms and degrees of Samadhi, the highest 
being Sa haja-Nirvikalpa-Samadhi which is a state of Pure 


Glossary 277 

Consciousness bereft of any subject (ego) and therefore, 
also, of any object. 

Samael (Heb.): A prince of the Qliphoth (q.v.) whose wife is 
the Elder Lilith (q.v.). The number of Samael is 131 which 
equates him, qabalistically, with Pan. 

Samedhi, Baron {Woo.): A form of Baron Cimitiere, Lord of 
the Dead. He is identical with Carfax, Carrefour, Kalfu, 
Karfu, etc., the Lord of the Crossroads, hence the Lord 
of Daath, the Place of the Cross(ing). 

Samsara (Skt): The interdependent counterpart of Nirvana 
(q.v.). When thoughts arise in consciousness, as on waking 
from sleep, the phenomenal universe also arises, and with 
it arises the idea of an T or beholder. These two: the self 
(subject) and the universe (object) rise and set together. 
They constitute Samsara and have no existence apart from 
the consciousness in which they arise. When subject and 
object are dissolved in Samadhi (q.v.), then Samsara 
becomes Nirvana. When both are transcended, then 
Supreme Enlightenment (i.e. Buddhahood) obtains. 

Satan: The Opposer; the Adverse and Averse One, and there¬ 
fore the reflecton or double that is the Devil, in the sense 
of being the antithesis of Being. See Shaitan, and Set. 

Saturn: The planetary vehicle of Set (q.v.). Saturn is ascribed 
to the third cosmic power-zone that is known as Binah 
(q.v.) and the City of the Pyramids (q.v.), the abode of 
Babalon (q.v.). 

Scarlet Woman: A name given to a certain class of woman 
chosen for her ability to transmit the vaginal vibrations of 
Babalon (q.v.). She is called scarlet because red is the colour 
or kala (q.v.) of the lunar current in its Martian phase. (See 
Aleister Crowley & the Hidden God, chapter 10). 

Sekhet (Eg.): The fierce lioness-headed goddess of the South. 
Her ferocious qualities typify sexual heat and the fire of 
fermented drink. Her counterpart in the North is the 
gende Bast, or Pasht, the lunar cat-headed deity of the 
coolth of night, as Sekhet is solar and of the furnace-heat 
of day. From the name Sekhet was derived the Indian 



278 


Nightside of Eden 

word shakti, meaning power, with special reference to the 
magical power of creation as typified by the Fire Snake 
(q.v.). 

Sekhet-Aahru (Eg.). Lit. The field or zone of Sekhet (q.v.). 
(See The Book of the Dead). 

Sephira (Heb.): Number, Word, Emanation. The name given 
to the cosmic power-zones as emanations of the numbers 
from 0-10, from the infinite ain of No-Thing and No- 
Number. 

Sepkiroth (Heb.): See Sephira. There are 10 sephiroth, and 
they constitute the cosmic emanations of power schema¬ 
tized as the Tree of Life. See Diagram of Tree. 

Sept (Eg.): A name of Set and of Sothis. Sept is the number 
seven and therefore identifiable as the primal goddess of 
the seven stars who was symbolized by her child Set 
(q.v.). 

Serau (Heb.): The ‘hairy deities’ (i.e. satyrs, panic demons) 
of ancient Egypt. 

Serk (Eg.): The scorpion-headed goddess whose name became 
identical with the circle, for the first magic circle was the 
! "tamale generative organ, over which Serk presided. 

\Jiet) The prototype of Shaitan or Satan, God of the South 
whose star is Sothis. Set, or Sut (Soot), means ‘black’, 
which is the chief colour (or kala) of Set. Black indicates 
the dark mysteries of this god which were originally 
enacted in the underworld, or ‘other’ world, of Amenta 
(q.v.). Set, as Lord of Amenta, or the hidden land (i.e. 
hell), is the epitome of subconsciousness, and therefore of 
the True Will or Hidden Sun, the son behind the sun 
symbolized by the Star of Set (i.e. Sothis). 

Shaitan: The Chaldean form of Set (q.v.). The god of the 
Yezidi whose stellar representative - Sothis - announced 
the rising of the river Nile. Shaitan, as the Star of Set, 
therefore represents the deluge of waters (blood) that 
embodies the Ophidian Current in its feminine or primal 
form. 

Shakti (Skt.): Power, particularly magical power. See Sekhet. 


Glossary 279 

Shalchbiron (Heb.): ‘The Flaming’. An Order of Qliphoth 
(q.v.) associated with the 19th Tunnel. 

Shalicu (Heb.): Sentinel of the 31st Tunnel. 

Shektnah (Heb.): The qabalistic version of Shakti (q.v.). The 
female embodiment of power. 

Shichiririon (Heb.): ‘The Black’! An Order of Qliphoth (q v ) 
attributed to the 18th Tunnel. 

Shin (Heb.): The letter and number of Spirit — 300. The 
triple fire-tongue that is the special emblem of Set (Shaitan) 
in his role of the God of the Deep (See Nodens, Neptune). 
The trident of Set or Typhon, is also the emblem of 
Chozzar (See Choronzon), the god of dark Atlantean 
sorcery that was carried over into the present aeon as the 
god of Death (Daath) and of the Abyss. 

Sin: See Shin. ‘The word of Sin is Restriction’. This means 
that Shin, as the lunar current (the moon-god, Sin), is the 
antithesis of Shin, the creative spirit or Fire Snake, and, as 
such, a key to Universe ‘B\ This may mean that Restriction 
(in the sense of Karezza, q.v.) could be a dynamic formula. 
Sh “ (Eg-): When the Sun-god Atum performed a magically 
directed act of masturbation he produced the twins, Shu 
and Tefnut. Shu is fire, or heat; Tefnut is moisture, 
humidity. (See The Hieratic Papyrus of Nesi Amsu, trans¬ 
lated by E. A. Wallis Budge, 1891). Shu is a sophisticated 
form of the African Echu, or Eshu (q.v.). 

Sh ^gal (Heb.): The desert fox symbolic of Set, the male 
half of the Beast 666. (The number of Shugal is 333). See 
Choronzon. 

Sirius: See Sothis. 

Sleep, Magical: For the nature of the Magical Sleep, see Part 
2, chapter 3. 

Smen (Eg.): The Smen, semen, or seed was originally the 
fructifying blood regarded as feminine, before the creative 
spirit was ascribed to masculinity. Hence, Am-Smen was 
the place of purgation and preparation. See Part 1 
chapter 6. ’ 

Sothis: The Star of Set front which the extra-terrestrial 



280 Nightside of Eden 

transmission of the Ophidian Current derived. Sothis is a 
‘twin’ Star and, as such, is a perfect glyph of the twins 
(Set-Horns). Sirius ‘A’ is visible; the other Sirius, Sirius ‘B’, 
is invisible. They represent Universes ‘A’ and ‘B\ 

Srividya (Skt.): The sacred knowledge or science (of the 
kalas, q.v.). 

Sushupti (Skt.): Dreamless sleep. One of the three states of 
Consciousness. See Jagrat, and Svapna. 

Svadistthana Chakra (Skt.): The microcosmic power-zone at 
the region of the solar plexus in the subtle anatomy of man. 

Svapna (Skt.): The dream state of consciousness. One of the 
three states of consciousness. See Jagrat, and Sushupti. 

Tan (Heb.): Var. Than. The root of the word Leviathan (q.v.), 
that old serpent ever seeking to penetrate into Eden. 

Tanith (Eg.): The feminine terminal (ith) added to Tan or 
Than denotes the Draconian Current and the magical 
formula of Babalon. 

Tarot: The ancient Egyptian Book of Thoth. It contains 78 
symbolic designs wherein are concealed the secret formulae 
of magical initiation. 78 is the number of MEZLA, ‘the 
influence from above, or beyond ’. Twenty-two of these 
glyphs treat specifically of the Major Arcana, or Mysteries, 
and of the qliphoth of these as described in the present 
book. 

Tefnut (Eg.): See Shu. 

Temphioth (Heb.): Sentinel of the 19th Tunnel. 

Teth (Heb.): ‘A lion serpent’. Teth is the number 9, and the 
lion-serpent is the symbol of the Cult of the Spermatozoon; 
it is thus a secret cypher of the IX°* O.T.O. (See Part 2, 
chapter 9). 

Tetragrammaton (Heb.): The Four lettered Holy Name of 
God — IHVH — commonly known as Jehovah. Its number 
is 26, which is the sum of the numbers of the sephiroth of 
the Middle Pillar of the Tree of Life (see diagram). Its 
tarotic attribution is that of The Devil, which relates to the 
26th Path under the aegis of Capricorn (a symbol of Babalon, 


Glossary 281 

the Scarlet Woman, q.v.). Tetragrammaton contains the 
highly complex doctrine pertaining to the Yod and the He 
(male and female) and their union (symbolised by the son, 
Vau) which results in the production or manifestation of 
He final: the daughter. (See Coph Nia, Koph, Qoph, etc.). 

Thantifaxath (Heb.): Sentinel of the 32nd and final Tunnel. 

Thelema (Gk.): The magical or ‘true’ will that is veiled 
beneath the psycho-sexual complex of man’s deepest 
consciousness. The purpose of magick is to unveil the True 
Will and reveal the Hidden Light. To this end it uses the 
formula of Love {Agape-, q.v.). 

Theli (Heb.): Dragon. 

Thoth: The Egyptian god of Magick whose vehicle is the 
kaf-ape (q.v.). In an occult sense, Thoth is synonymous 
with Daath (q.v.). 

Tiphereth (Heb.): The sixth and central cosmic power-zone 
represented on the Tree of Life as the sephira called 
‘Beauty’ (Tiphereth). It is assumed to the sun. 

Tree of Death: The averse Tree of Life with its tunnels of 
Set to which Daath is the Gateway. 

Tree of Life: The ten cosmic power-zones and the twenty- 
two paths constitute the Tree of Life. (See diagram). The 
complex system of kalas (q.v.) attributed to the paths has 
been treated extensively in the Typhonian Trilogy. 

Tuat (Eg.): The passage or tunnel leading to Amenta (the 
underworld). Sometimes known as the Duat. It is the 
Egyptian original of the word Daath (q.v.). 

Turn (Eg.): The evening or setting sun associated with the 
West and with the underworld of Amenta( q.v.). 

Turiya (Skt.): Pure undifferentiated Consciousness that is 
absolutely bereft of all thought constructs. It is the one 
constant reality, and the Only Reality, underlying the 
three states of consciousness known as jagrat (q .v.), svapna 
(q.v.), and sushupti (q.v.). 

Typhon: The Mother of Set and the Supreme symbol of the 
Draconian Cult in which the primal goddess is worshipped 
as shakti (power). 


282 


Nightside of Eden 


283 


Tzalalimiron (Heb.): ‘The Changers’. An Order of Qliphoth 
(q.v.) attributed to the 17th Tunnel. 

Tzaphiririon (Heb.): ‘The Scratchers’. An Order of Qliphoth 
(q.v.) attributed to the 20th Tunnel. 

Tzuflifu (Heb.): Sentinel of the 28th Tunnel. 

Upadhi (Skt.): The superimposition upon Reality (Pure Con¬ 
sciousness) of an illusory concept that is assumed to be 
real (e.g. the ‘self’, ‘others’, the world of names and forms). 
When this upadhi is dissolved, enlightenment occurs. 

Uranus: The planetary representative of Daath. Uranus 
indicates the sudden and explosive nature of the formula 
of magick (or change) associated with the eleventh cosmic 
power-zone. 

Ur-hekau: ‘The Mighty One of Enchantments’. The Great 
Magick Power represented by the thigh of the goddess (see 
Khepsh). The great magical power ( Khu ) resides in the 
queue or tail (i.e. the vagina) of Typhon. Hekau connects 
this power with hekt (q.v.) or Hecate, the lunar ophidian 
current represented by such zootypes as the frog, hare, 
lizard,, ape, hyena, and other types of periodic change 
(magick) and renewal. 

Uriens (Heb.): Sentinel of the 16th Tunnel. (Cf. Oriens). 

Vahana (Skt.): vehicle, medium, menstruum. 

Vama (Skt.): Woman, Left. 

Vamachara (Skt.): Lit. The Way of Woman, or the Left Hand 
Path. The tantric or magical use of the female kalas (q.v.) 
in the Draconian Cult. 

Vama Marg (Skt.): See Vamachara. 

Vampire Vortex : A specific formula of necromantic magick 
whereby the soul or astral double of a ritually consecrated 
and slain priestess is made subservient to the will of the 
magician. 

Vau (Heb.): The number six (or sex). The process of sexual 
union typified by the son, or child, of that union. Vau 
means a ‘nail’, typical of the phallus. 


Glossary 

Vever (Voo): The Voodoo equivalent of a yantra (q.v.). 

Ville-aux-Champs (Voo.): The name of the True Shamballah, 
the City consecrated to the rites of Babalon, Odudua, 
Tanith, etc. 

Viparita karani (Skt.): Total reversion of the senses. See 
viparita maithuna. 

Viparita maithuna (Skt.): Lit. ‘Upside down sexual congress’. 
A form of magical union involving the total reversion of 
the flow of consciousness from objective experience to 
subjective awareness, and beyond both to pure undif¬ 
ferentiated Consciousness. The zoomorphic totems of this 
reversion of consciousness include such animals as the bat 
(that sleeps upside down), and the hyena (and other 
retromingent beasts). In the Book of Thoth this formula is 
represented by the Hanged Man who is crucified upside 
down and who thus forms the symbol of the Cross or 
crossing over into ‘other’ (i.e. averse) dimensions. 

Virginity, Magical: See Part 2, chapter 3. A woman chosen 
for magical rites is said to be virgin when she is in the 
dream state or oracular phase of a rite. She is then ‘un¬ 
awakened’, or in a magical sleep (q.v.). 

Visuddha Chakra (Skt.): The microcosmic power-zone 
located at the region of the throat (the centre of the 
magical Word) in the occult human anatomy. This zone is, 
significantly, repesented by a 16-petalled lotus, which 
typifies the 8 power-zones of the male doubled or reflected 
in those of the female partner, or shakti. 

Voltigeurs (Voo.): A term used by Black Snake Cultists to 
denote the Leapers or Vaulters of the Paths on the ‘other 
side’ of the Tree. See Hecate, Hekt. 

Wanga (Voo.): ‘The work of the Sword’. ( AL. II, 37). The 
sword is a symbol of the female as the cleaver or cutter in 
two. See Zain. 

Yantra (Skt.): A geometric pattern or design depicting the 





284 Nightside of Eden 

vibrations or sound-waves (mantra) which constitute the 
formula of a deity or a magical force. 

Yesod (Heb.): ‘Foundation’ or ‘fundament’. The ninth 
cosmic power-zone. It concentrates the lunar light as the 
reifying power of the Ophidian Current. This is the Cult- 
centre of the Yezidi who use the formula of Set, or 
Shaitan. See A leister Crowley & the Hidden God. 

Yetzirah (Heb.): The astral world, or world of formation. 
Yendv. The votaries of Yezid, who concentrated the power 
(shakti) of Yesod into the Cult of Shaitan or Set, of which 
Aiwass, 93 (q.v.) is the transmitter. 

Yod (Heb.): The number ten. It means the total, the com¬ 
plete series of power-zones from Malkuth to Kether. Ten 
is the one before eleven that causes complete change. It 
is symbolized by fire in the macrocosm, and by the solar- 
phallic fire (or spermatozoon) in the microcosm. Yod 
means a ‘hand’, thus typifying the executor of the Will 
(Thelema. q.v.). 

Yog-Sothoth : A name which appears in the fictions of H.P. 
Lovecraft. It is an amalgam of the god-names Thoth and 
Set, the yog, or union, being their synonymity. 

Zatn (Heb.): The number seven. The supreme number of the 
Draconian Tradition symbolized by the twins, Set-Horus 
(Gemini), and by the Serpent (Z) and the Eye (Ain). The 
word Zain, meaning a ‘sword’ is a glyph of the Goddess 
as the cleaver in twain, and of the Eye of the Seipent 
attributed to the Daughter (see Coph Nia). Zain is also the 
symbol of sex-magical polarity, and is attributed to the 
Twins or Lovers in the tarot of the zodiac. The letter Zain, 
®P el * m equaIs 67 > which signifies the womb of the 
Mother (Binah = 67) containing the twins, i.e. Set-Horus. 
Taking the final letter of Zain (i.e. ‘n’) at its full value, the 
word then equals 717 which is one less than 718, a sup¬ 
remely significant number in the Cult of Thelema, for it is 
the number of the Stele of Revealing and of the ‘Abomina¬ 
tion of Desolation’ connected with it. See The Typhonian 


Glossary 285 

Trilogy. The whole of this symbolism should be studied in 
connection with that of the 17th Tunnel. 

Zamradiel (Heb.): Sentinel of the 17th Tunnel 
Zomb'teme Mystere du (Voo.): A term used in the Black 
Snake Cult to denote a form of necromancy resulting in 
the production of a zombie (q.v.). 
z ombie (Voo)’ A neither living nor dead creature that has 
had its principle of intelligence (soul) ejected, and whose 
body has been invaded by alien forces or by the will of 
the magician that has generated it. 

Zos: A term used in Zo, Kia Cultus (q.v.). to denote the 
body considered as a whole’, i.e. as a total field of aware- 
ness. See Images and Oracles of Austin Osman Spare, 
os Kta Cultus : The Cult of the Zos (q.v.) and the Kia (q v ) 
created by Austin Osman Spare. 


Bibliography 

{Books under authors;periodicals under titles) 

Bagchi, Prabodh C.: Studies in the Tantras, Calcutta Univer¬ 
sity Press, 1939. 

Baudin, Rev. P.: Fetichism and Fetich Worshippers, Benzieer 
Bros., New York, 1885. 8 

BC ?903 RCV Walten BibHa Cabalistica > David Nutt, London, 

Bertiaux, Michael P.: Grade Papers of the Monastery of the 
6m»0 RayS (197 °' 76) - P '°- Box . ^ tt^ago, Illinois 

Blavatsky, H. P.: The Secret Doctrine. Theosophical Pub. 
House, 1888; Discussions on the Stanzas of the Secret 
Doctrine published in Transactions of the Blavatsky Lodge 
of the Theosophical Society, L.A. California, 1923. 

Ca i9 a 75 FritJ ° f: ^ Ta ° PkySiCS ’ Wildwood House, London, 

Cavendish, Richard: The Powers of Evil, Routledge, 1975. 

Churchward, Albert: The Origin and Evolution of Religion 
Allen and Unwin, 1924. 

Cincinnati Journal of Ceremonial Magick, The. Volume 1 
(1976) contains The Book of Maat {Liber Pennae Prae- 
numbra) received by Gary Straw and Margaret Cook. 
Conquering Child Publishing Co., P.O. Box 1343 
Cincinnati, Ohio 45201, U.S.A. 


287 


Bibliography 

Conway, Henry: Life, Death and Antimatter, article published 
m Frontiers of Consciousness (ed. John White), the Julian 
Press, New York, 1974. 

Crowley Aleister: AL {The Book of the Law), Mezla, O.T.O., 
Buffalo N.Y. (See Mezla); Book of Lies, The {Liber 333), 
Weiser, New York, 1970; Book of Thoth, The, O.T.O. 
London, 1944; Confessions of Aleister Crowley (Ed’ 

Cape ’ 1%9; C e phaleodium 
Working (See Mezla No. 5), Liber 777; Liber CCXXXI 
(published in The Equinox, vol. I, No. vii); Magical and 
Philosophical Commentaries on the Book of the Law (ed 
Symonds and Grant), 93 Publishing, Montreal, 1974- 
Magical Record of the Beast 666, The (Ed. Symonds and 

’ S U< 19?2 ’ 30(1 93 Publishin §> Montreal, 

JqZ^’ Maglck Ed - Symonds and Grant), Routledge, 
1973, Samual Weiser, New York, 1975. 

OaJi Salvador: The Secret Life of Salvador Dali. Dial Press, 

*-Gra“„? J u, F 'fr : n A e J ecre ‘ Wisdom °f‘ h ‘ Qabalah, Rider, n.d., 
ant, Steffi and Kenneth: Carfax Monographs (Nos. I-X) 
Carfax, London, 1959-63. 

GT 7q79 ^ Cnnet ^L Tke Magicd Revival > Frederick MuUer, 
6 7 UeI Weiser ’ RY - 1974; Ubaldini Editore, Rome, 
1973; Aleister Crowley & the Hidden God, Frederick 
Muller, London, 1973; Samuel Weiser, NY 1974- 
Ubaldini Editore, Roma, 1975; Cults of the Shadow, 
London > >975; Samuel Weiser, N.Y., 
1976, Ubaldini Editore, Roma (forthcoming); (The above 
three titles constitute the Typhonian Trilogy); Images and 
Omcfes of Austin Osman Spare, Frederick Muller, London, 

Gray, Terence (Wei Wu Wei): All Else is Bondage, Hong Kong 
University Press, 1970; Ask the Awakened, RKP, 1963. 


288 


Nigh tside of Eden 
Halevy, Z. b. S.: Adam and the Kabalistic Tree , Rider, 1974 
Hl$ l 916 RCV A1CXander: The Two Bab y l °ns, Partridge V Co.’ 

^°i?63 HanS: Tke Gn ° StiC Reli & on > Beacon Press, Boston, 

Kuhn, Alvin Boyd: The Lost Light, Academy Press, New 
Jersey, 1940. 

Lenormant, Francois: Chaldean Magic, Samuel Bagster, 1877. 
Levi, Eliphas: Transcendental Magic, Rider, n.d. 

Lovecraft, H. P.: The Case of Charles Dexter Ward, Gollancz 
1964: The Lurker at the Threshold (in collaboration with 
August Derleth), Gollancz 1945. 

Lovecraft, H. P., and Conover, Willis: Lovecraft at Last 
Carrollton-Clark, Arlington, Virginia, 1975 
Machen, Arthur: The White People (in Tales of Horror and 
the Supernatural), The Richards Press, 1949. 

Massey, Gerald: A Book of the Beginnings, Williams and 
Norgate, 1881; The Natural Genesis, Williams and Norgate 
1883; Ancient Egypt, the Light of the World, T. Fisher 
Unwin, 1907; Lectures (reprint), Samuel Weister, NY 
1974. ' ’’ 

^1970’ MaCGreg ° r ’ S * L,: The Kabbalah Unveiled, RKP., 

Mehta, Vithaldas Nathabhai: Sri Haranath, His Play & Pre¬ 
cepts, Bombay, 1954. 

Randolph, P. B.: Eulis, Toledo, Ohio, 1896 
Rangaswamy, M. A. D.: The Religion and Philosophy of 
Tevaram, University of Madras, 1958. 

Rohmer, Sax: Bat-Wing, Cassell, 1921. 

Rohmer, Elizabeth Sax (and Cay Van Ash): Master of 
Villainy-, a biography of Sax Rohmer. Bowling Green 
University Press, Ohio, 1972. 

Rothovius Andrew: Lovecraft and the New England Mega¬ 
liths, published m The Dark Brotherhood, Arkham House 
Wisconsin, 1966. ’ 

SCh RKp m ,’l965 h0m °" Kabbal “ h “ nd “ S 


Bibliography 289 

Sothis: A Magazine of the New Aeon, edited by fan Bailev 
David Hall, and Michael Magee. 346 London Road, St 
Albans, Herts. 

Spare, Austin Osman: The Book of Pleasure, 93 Publishing 
Montreal, 1974. 

Stirling, William: The Canon (An Exposition of the Pagan 
Mystery perpetuated in the Cabala as the Rule of all the 
Arts), Elkin Mathews, 1897. 

Taylor, John: Black Holes, Fontana/Collins, 1974. 

Temple, Robert K.G.: The Sirius Mystery, Sidgwick and 
Jackson, 1976. 

Waite, A. E.: The Book of Ceremonial Magic, University 
Books, New York, 1961. 

Wei Wu Wei: See Gray, Terence. 

Woodroffe, Sir John: Karpuradistotra (Hymn to Kali), 
Luzac, 1953. Shakti and Shakta, Luzac, London, 1929. 


Errata 


Page 13, line 8: physical 

20, bottom: add missing footnote 32: Lamed = 30; Teth = 9. 

44, penultimate line: delete extra 1 

45, last para: menstruum misprinted 5 times 
48, line 15: menstruum 

53, line 13: insert previous before Trilogy: 

footnote 6: delete The Book of the Law and: substitute Liber 418 
79, penultimate line: delete which and the s at the end of culminates 
81, line 27: perish 
95, line 26: veritable 
97, line 25: delete wo and substitute who 
line 28: add footnote notation after Child, and add footnote as follows: 
One is the Mother, two is the child, three the pubescent male evolving 
from the child. 

120 , footnote 8: insert quotation mark at beginning 
143, line 2: outwards 
line 18: Sheitan 
146, line 4: through the ape 
line 21: menstruum 

148, footnote 27: applies, not implies as printed 
159, line 8: semblances 

181, footnote 16: bracketed words should read; Author’s Foreword instead 
of General Introduction 
186, line 2 Delete third n in sentinelled 

195, line 21: insert is after current 
footnote 11: for cite read site 

196, line 6: priestess 

197, line 20: gulfs 

204, line 31: practitioners 
208, line 25: immortality 
222, line 3: which 

line 27: A black magician instead of Black magicians 
226, line 11: ‘Light In Extension’ (initials in italics) 

230, last line: fetish 
244, footnote 18: (DM) 

254, line 9: delete and 
line 33: small arteries 

257, line 8: add: Crowley identifies Adonai with the Serpent Apap, q.v. 
259, line 35: sephira 


Index 


A.'. A.. (Argenteum Astrum), 15,106, 
133,145, 224, 256 
A’abirion, 214, 256 
A’anon’nin, 206, 228, 256 
Abiku, 201 

Abrahadabra, 19, 66, 98, 200, 206, 
256, 264 

Absence, 104,142 

Abyss (The Abyss is dealt with so ex¬ 
tensively that specific references are 
omitted in this index). 

Achad, Frater (see Jones, C. S.), 2, 10, 
11, 28, 29, 82, 97, 101, 117, 122, 
125, 130, 142, 187, 241,242, 243, 
251,271 
Acheron, 157 
Acquisitio, 253 
Ad, 68, 257 

Adam, 44, 65, 66, 72-4, 80, 85, 121, 
169, 188, 256, 270 

Adam and the Kabbalistic Tree 
(Halevy), 114 
Aden, 68 

Adimiron, 187,189, 257 
Adjustment (Atu VIH), 214 
Ado, 179,257, 274 

Adonai (see Holy Guardian Angel), 
213,255, 257 
Aeon (Atu XX), 248, 250 
Aethyr, 160 

Afefe, 160, 161, 257, 258, 263 
Af-Ra, 95 

Africa (see Kaf-Ruti), 136, 174, 179, 
193, 224, 254, 257,262, 274 
Agape, 60, 70,178,257,281 


Agial, 169 
AHA, 245-7 

Aharman (Ahriman), 47 
Aidoneus (see Adonai), 213, 214, 257 
Aidowedo, 203, 221, 227, 257 
Ain, 5, 7, 11-13, 24, 25, 31, 36, 40, 
42, 49, 55, 57, 65, 74, 87, 93, 94, 
109, 121, 144, 154,156,158,164, 
176, 182, 216, 229, 257, 268, 276, 
278, 284 

Air (see Space), 116, 118, 119, 154, 
156-8, 161, 167, 178, 185, 188, 
276 

Aiwass (AIVASh), 47, 48, 53, 69, 72, 
82, 102, 103, 120, 179, 228, 242, 
257, 258, 266, 284 
Ajna Chakra, 150, 257 
Akasha, 128,160, 257 
Akkad, 126 
Akrasia, 103 

AL, 29, 35, 42, 53, 73, 103, 166, 
216, 258 
Al-Azif, 147 
Alchemy, 135,136 

Aleister Crowley & the Hidden God 
(Grant), 2, 17, 22, 27, 39, 55, 93, 
129, 130, 146, 156,172,178,179, 
184, 229, 231, 236, 246, 264, 273, 
275, 277, 284, 287 

Aleph, 14, 115, 116, 154, 157, 167, 
258 

Alim, 172, 258 

All Else is Bondage (Wei), 245 

Altar, 253 

Amen-Ra, 134 


I 



292 Nightside of Eden 


Am Smen, 60, 279 

Amenta, 16, 25, 37, 39, 44, 93, 108, 
120, 200, 206, 207, 219, 220,225, 
245, 247, 249, 250, 258, 263, 272, 
278,281 

Anahata Chakra, 150 
Anandalahari (tr. Woodroffe), 110 
Anandamayi Ma, Sri 130 
Anansi (see Once), 179, 258, 274 
Anatomy of the Body of God (Achad), 

Ancient Art & Mythology (Knight), 
36 

Ancient Egyptians, The (Wilkinson). 
187 

Ankh-af-na-Khonsu, 134 
Annihilation, Place of, 67 
Anti-Christ, 28, 29 
Anubis, 83,190 
Anusaya Devi, Srimati, 130 
Aossic, 19, 71, 73, 167, 169, 258 
Apap, 160, 221, 255, 257, 258, 263, 
274 

Ape (see Cynocephalus; also Kaf-Ape), 
10, 79, 93,150,272, 282 
Ape of Thoth, 11,53,80,82,85,103, 
146,163 
Apocalypse, 184 

Apophis, 60, 137, 160, 161, 200, 257, 
258, 263,274 
Apuleius, 39 

Aquarius, 18, 108, 184, 185, 229, 258 
Aries, 238 
Arke, 94 

Arrow, 172, 190, 192, 216, 217, 246 

Artemis, 169 

Asa, 156 

Asherah, 97 

Asi, 156 

Ask the Awakened (Wet), 63 
Ass, 45, 112, 113, 148, 151, 230, 263 
Assiah, 42,43,258 
Asthma, 255 

Astral Body, 13, 38, 83, 99, 222,223, 
234, 266, 282 

Atavisms, 125, 164, 171, 193, 196, 
205, 206, 233-5, 258 
Atem (Atum), 169, 218, 258, 263, 279 
Atlantis, 194, 222-4 
Atma, 114, 258 
Atmadarshan, 34, 258 
Atziluth, 43, 258 
Aud (see Od), 177 


Axe, 102, 246, 247, 272 
Ayers, Janice R., xiv, 125, 288 
Ayin, 11, 18, 21, 36, 82, 146, 167, 
216, 229, 257, 258, 268, 274 
Aza, 259 

Azathoth, 147,182 
Azoth. 154,182, 259 

Babalon, 35, 43, 53, 71, 95,104, 111, 
113, 145, 146, 178,184, 200, 229, 
230, 233, 242, 252, 259-61, 263, 
274, 275, 277, 280, 283 
Babe of the Abyss, 14, 16, 129, 146 
Babel, 53,93,95 
Babylon, 179 
Bacbuc, 94 
Badagry, 257, 274 
Bagchi, P.C., 286 
Bagh-i-Muattar (Crowley), 234 
Bailey, Jan, xiv, 289 
Bancroft, H.H., 91 

Baphomet, 27, 29, 32,45, 57, 71,107, 
168,207,243,259,273 
Baratchial, 162, 259 
Basie, Count, 148 
Bist, 59,221,277 

Bat (see Vampire Bat), 126, 135, 136, 
283 

Bath Kol, 164, 259 
Batwing (Rohmer), 126,127 
Baudelaire, Charles, 131 
Baudin, Rev. P., 286 
Beast, The, 21, 30, 43-6, 59, 81, 95, 
143-6, 168, 184, 193, 194, 202, 
203, 206, 207, 220, 243, 252,260, 
261,273, 275,279 
Bee, 35,125,134 
Beetle, 20, 220 
Begley, Rev. W., 286 
Behemiron, 185, 259 
Bel, 108 
Belial, 44 
Bengal, 130 

Berosus, 51,53, 77,93, 272 
Bertiaux, Michael, xiv, 3,4,10, 58, 64 
90, 107, 125, 142, 191, 197, 208, 
221-3, 233, 240-2, 250, 251, 255, 
261,269,286 
Besz, 82 

Beth, 14, 146,163,164, 259 
Binah, 8, 9, 24, 25, 30, 32, 37, 86, 
134, 145, 179, 180,191,195, 241, 
259,261,274, 277, 284 


Index 293 


Bindu, 7, 20, 21,144,167 
Black Brothers, 8, 26, 27, 133, 134, 
145, 146, 162, 163, 208, 209, 223, 
243 

Black Eagle, 128 
Black Flame, 101,117 
Black Hole, 89, 142,171 
Black Holes (Taylor), 90 
Black Magic, 27, 208, 222, 243, 244, 
251 

Black Mass, 78 

Black Snake Cult (see Couleuvre Noire, 
La), 4, 90, 107, 125, 147, 173, 
221, 233, 240, 258, 261, 264, 
269-71,283,285 

Blackness, 61, 77, 84, 85, 87, 160, 
162,217,231,257,267,268,278 
Blackwood, Algernon, 89,127 
Blavatsky, H.P., 27, 32, 64, 73, 79, 
107,157,170,191,286 
Blind Horus, 84, 231 
Blood, 45, 49, 53, 55, 63, 74, 78, 99, 
117, 118, 121, 125,126,129,149, 
158, 167, 169, 178, 182-4, 187, 
191, 196, 218, 220, 226, 235, 236, 
244, 257, 263, 276,278, 279 
Boar, 177,178,195 
Bohu, 104 
Bdn-Pa Current, 125 
Book of Ceremonial Magic, The 
(Waite), 43,44 

Book of Dzyan, The (Blavatsky), 28, 
32,52, 76,107 
Book of Enoch, The, 52 
Book of Lies, The (see Liber 333; 
Crowley), 19 

Book of Pleasure, The (Spare), 10,148 
Book of the Dead, The, 31,38,44, 57, 

58, 95,104,113,173,278 

Book of Thoth, The (Crowley), xii, 53, 

59, 94, 107, 115, 157, 184, 202, 
221,228, 280,283 

Boulogne, Bois de, 130 
Bow (see Rainbow), 172, 173, 190, 
192,221,246 

Brahmarandhra Chakra, 150, 260 
Brethren of the New Light, 208, 209 
Briah, 43, 271 
Bride, 255, 271 
Buddha, 260 

Buddhist Formula, 40,277 
Bultu (see Spectral Hyena), 193-6, 
260, 264, 266 


Bultungin, 193, 260 

Bundahish, 47, 49, 52, 80, 85, 113 

Cairo, 257 
Cakes of Light, 218 
Calf, 14 

Camel, 14, 169,190,199, 264 
Cancer, 19, 198,199, 203,260 
Canon, The (Stirling), 253 
Capra, Fritjof.il 1,286 
Capricorn, 229, 230, 280 
Carfax, 195, 260, 277, 

Carfax Monographs (Grant), 51, 287 
Carrefour, Maitre, 195, 260,277 
Case of Charles Dexter Ward, The 
(Lovecraft), 171,181 
Cavendish, Richard, 143, 286 
Centre Point (London), 122,124 
Cephaloedium Working, The (Crowley), 

Cerberus, 133, 220, 249 
Chaitanya, Sri, 130 
Chakras, 9, 32,149,213,221, 260 
Chaldean Magic (Lenormant), 100 
Champana, 180, 260 
Chandrakala, 134,136, 260,267 
Chango, 238 

Chaos, 60, 77, 84, 110, 145, 174, 
182, 238, 260 
Charadth, 198, 260 
Charis, 111 

Cheth, 19, 21, 71, 167, 182, 198, 
242, 261 

Child, xiii, 14, 55, 56, 60, 95, 111, 
112, 128, 135, 177, 178, 184, 
229, 250, 264, 265, 282 
Chit-jada-granthi, 37,48, 261 
Chokmah, 8, 9, 24, 25, 30, 37, 86, 
94, 145, 149, 150, 179, 180, 184, 
185,191, 197,261,271 
Chorazin, 240 

Choronzon, 3, 8, 9, 30,34,43,46,48, 
52, 53, 60, 64,67, 69,79,100,102, 
103,115,143,144,146,168,180, 
191, 193, 196, 226, 230, 239, 243, 
248, 251,260, 261,279 
Chozzar, 9, SO, 180, 191, 192, 194, 
226,248,261,268,273,279 
Christ, 111,157 
Christianity, 218 
Chronos (also Kronus), 110,175 
Chthulhu myth os, 147 
Churchward, Albert, 61, 286 



294 


Nightside of Eden 


Cimitiere, Baron, 195, 260, 277 
Cincinnati Journal of Ceremonial 
Magick, The (fid. Bundy), xiv, 114. 
286 

Clairvoyance, 170 
Clef, 14, 16 
Colour (see Kalas), 160 
Colour Scale, 152 
Colquhoun, Ithell, 124,128 
Confessions of Aleister Crowley, The 
(Ed. Symonds and Grant), 43, 72, 
90, 257 

Conover, W., 288 
Consecration, Works of, 206 
Conway, H., 238, 287 
Cook, Margaret, xiv, 107, 266, 286 
Coph (see Koph), 36, 91, 92, 96,101, 
267 

Coph Nia, 35,36,78,91,261,267,284 
Cosmic Doctrine, The (Fortune), 107 
Couleuvre Noire, La (see Black Snake 
Cult), 64, 147, 149,150,221,261, 
274 

Couleuvre Rouge, La, 147, 149, 261. 
274 

Crab, 20, 199, 203, 220, 260 
Cradle (see Swing), 128,129 
Crantz, 90 

Crocodile, 55, 56, 81, 254, 267, 271 
274 

Cross, 15, 16, 57, 72, 77, 78, 95, 170, 
195, 211, 220, 226, 245, 277, 283 
Crossing, 15, 16, 57, 67, 72, 95, 108, 
118, 129, 170, 190,195, 207, 211, 
283 

Crossroads, 126, 195, 277 
Crowley, Aleister, xii, 15, 19, 28, 32, 
48, 56, 57, 63, 66, 73,90, 241, 243 
Crowley, Rose (nee Kelly), 17 
Crucifixion (see Crossing), 192, 234 
249 

Crystal, 117, 153 

Cults of the Shadow (Grant), 9, 10 
18, 28, 36, 46, 58, 63, 64, 82, 90,’ 
96, 97, 107, 117, 120, 121, 125, 
130, 131, 136, 147,148,160,167, 
168, 173, 177, 187, 191,197,199, 
203, 204, 209, 221,229, 234, 238, 
240, 241, 243, 261, 271, 287 
Cunnilinctus, 198, 246 
Curse, 156, 277 

Cynocephalus, 10, 15,41,49, 58,118, 
182, 261, 267 


Daath, 3, 8, 10, 21, 24, 25, 26, 29, 30, 
32, 33, 34, 37, 38, 39, 40, 43, 44, 
49, 50, 53-5, 81, 83, 86, 87, 89, 
98, 112, 114, 118, 142, 145, 147, 
149, 150, 151, 157,171,182,191, 
193, 197, 211, 228, 238, 241-3, 
248, 249, 260, 262, 272, 273, 277, 
279, 281,282 
Dagdagiel, 176, 262 
Dagdagiron, 230, 262 
Dagger, 116,158 
Dagon, 51 

Daleth, 15, 36, 71,167,169, 176, 177, 
178, 262 

Dali, Salvador, 27,132, 157, 287 
Damballah, 203 
Dance of Shiva, 24 
Dangbe, 203, 221,262 
Dark Brotherhood, The (Lovecraft and 
others), 208, 289 

Dark Doctrine (see Mo Ayon), 241-3 
250, 264, 271 

Daughter, xiii, 36, 65-7, 78, 91, 92, 
96, 97, 101, 176, 177, 183, 241, 
242, 259, 261, 265, 268, 271, 281, 
284 

Dawn of Magic, The (Pauwels and 
Bergier), 107 

Death, xiv, 8,. 17, 30, 31, 37, 38, 45, 
50, 109, 191, 193, 208, 220-5, 
249, 250, 254, 260, 262, 273, 276, 
279 

Death Posture, 41,136,148,149, 206, 
208, 221,262 
Dee, Dr. John, 48, 79,193 
Deep Ones, 217 

Demchog Tantra (Ed. Dawa-Samdun). 
110 

Descent into Hell (Williams), 127 
Desecration, Works of, 206 
Devil, 8, 31, 83, 143, 146, 167, 178, 
179, 188, 229, 231,277 
Devil, The (Atu XV), 71, 166, 168, 
229, 230, 280 
Divination, 156,170 
Dog, 29, 30,150,169, 275 
Dogon, 224, 262 

Door, 15, 36, 71, 167, 169, 176, 177, 
178,262 

Doije Phagmo, 111 

Double, 8, 13, 146, 181, 188, 229, 
277 

Double Horizon, 54,111, 270 


54,111,270 


Index 


295 


Double Power, Wand of, 54, 55 
Double Veil, 54 

Dove, 56, 57, 71, 73, 116, 161, 167, 
177,178,266, 276 

Draconian Current, 110, 111, 125 
134, 137, 166, 173,178,231,233,’ 
259, 260, 262, 265, 271, 274, 


280,281,282,284,288 
Draconis, 108,192, 262 
Dragon, 8, 43, 52, 55, 56, 81, 85, 108, 
- Dr 18 4xJ!7 ? 2 18, 233,270 

181, 206, 24 0, 275 , 283 ’ 1?1 j 

Dreams,^, 

Druids, ?50 y 


Eagle, 156,184 

Earth, 119, 145, 176, 179-82, 203 
229,249, 251,253,255 
East, 85, 274 
Echidna, 133 

Echu (also Eshu), 262, 270, 279 
Eden, 40, 53, 64, 65, 67, 69, 82, 86, 
104, 243, 263, 264, 271, 273, 280, 
Edom, 31, 63,114, 263 
Ego, 23, 25, 26, 37-9,41,43,45-8, 50, 
53, 70, 112, 163, 208, 217, 244 
249, 258, 261, 277 
Egungun, 214, 250, 254 
Egypt, 118, 135, 136, 182, 268, 274 
Egyptian Inscriptions (Sharpe), 112 
Elements, Five, 45 
Elere, 201 
Eleusis, Rites of, 68 
Eleven, 9, 10, 21, 29, 30, 32,40, 55-8, 
63, 66, 98, 99,108,109,116,118, 
154, 156-8, 160, 163, 228, 273, 
282, 284 

Elixir Rubeus (El. Rub.), 231, 263 
Emperor, The (Atu IV), 237 
Encyclopedia of the Unexplained (Ed. 

Cavendish), 79 
Enoch, 48 

Eros, 39,40,192, 193,195 

Esau, 63, 263 

Esdras, 74 

Ethiopia, 133, 196 

Eudoxus, 101 

Eulis (Randolph), 39, 52 

Evil, 142, 203, 218, 238, 244, 251 

Existence, 40 


Eye, 11,17,18, 21,22,36,42,49,57, 
58, 74,82,84,129,148,149,150, 
156, 167, 178, 185, 229, 230, 246, 
257, 258, 261, 268, 276, 284 

Fafnir Worm, 161, 263 
Fairies, 159 

Fall, the, 23,62, 64-6,104 
Fan, 158 

Feather (of Maat), 214, 250 
Feet, 129,131 
Fermentation, 35, 58, 277 
Fetichism and Fetich Worshippers 
(Baudin), 217 

Fire, 45, 60, 61, 131, 149, 184, 227, 
248-51, 277,279, 284 
Fire Snake, 32, 39, 40, 63, 72, 129, 
131, 147, 149, 150,177, 251, 252,’ 
260-3, 269, 272-4, 278, 279 
Flowers, 19, 67 
Flute, 158 

Fool, 73, 79, 80, 83, 115, 116, 120, 
157,160,169 

Fool, The (Atu 0), 79, 80, 115, 200 
Fortuna, 212 

Fortune, Dion, 29,49,127,133 
Fox, 41,133,180, 279 
Freemasonry, xii, xiii, xiv 
Frog, 79, 148, 168, 172, 173 , 223, 
224, 239, 240, 244, 263, 265, 268, 
282 

Frontiers of Consciousness (Ed. White), 

Fuller, J.F.C., 66, 287 

Gamaliel (see Ass), 112,148, 151, 230, 
263 

Ganin-Gub, 195, 196, 264 
Gardner, Gerald B., 122-4 
Gargophias, 166, 264 
Geburah, 145,149 
Gedulah, 145 
Geh, 73, 74, 79-84 
Gematria, 264 

Gemini, 18, 31,195, 264, 271, 284 
Genesis, 51,53,67, 70,94 
Germer, Karl J., xiv 
Gestation, 98,192, 217 
Ghagiel, 240, 264 

Giants, 53, 61, 62, 68, 88, 93, 101 

130,146,174,187,235,272 

Gilgalim, 74, 75 
Gilgamesh Epic, 52 


296 


Nightside of Eden 


GHlulim, 75,109 

Gimel, 14,15, 86,169,190, 264 

Glamorgan, 193 

Gnosis, 100,110, 111, 135,146 
Gnostic Relgion, The (Jonas), 182 

Goat, 8,126, 229, 230, 274 
Gobi Desert, 107 

Goddess 393, The, 70, 71, 166-8, 229 
Goddess Fifteen, 17, 187, 229, 274 
Goetia, 43, 146 

Golden Dawn, The Hermetic Order of 
the, 15, 56, 124, 126, 129, 277, 
249 

Gomorrah, 211,212 
Gorgon, 189 

Graal, Holy, 19,167,198, 206 
Grant, Kenneth, 167, 287 
Grant, Steffi, xiv, 287 
Gray, Terence (Wei Wu Wei), 287 
Great Old Ones, 68, 69, 89, 160, 167, 
244, 258 

Great Work, 19, 21, 30,33, 72,98,99, 
168, 182, 206, 242, 256, 260, 264 
Greenlanders, 90 

Guede-Nibho, 195, 197, 240,264, 268 
Gurdjieff, Georgei, 73,157, 287 


Had, 200, 213, 257, 264 
Hades, 133, 213, 214, 249 
Hadit, 9-11, 30, 37, 55, 69, 81, 178 
182,242,244, 264 
Hak, 57, 58 
Halevy, Z., 288 
Hall, David, 157, 287, 289 
Hammer, Von, 259 

Hand, 17, 21, 41, 49, 129, 150, 205, 
209, 284 

Hanged Man, The (Atu XH), 116,117. 
217,283 

Har, 60, 61, 178, 229, 264, 265, 268 
Haranath, Pagal, 130, 288 
Haranath (Shri), His Play and Precepts 
(Mehta), 130,288 

Harpocrates (see Har, Hoor-paar-Kraat, 
etc.), 146, 265 
Harris, Frieda Lady, 203 
Harris Papyrus , 79 
Harris, Thomas L., 267 
Harvard (New England), 208 
Hathor, 181,182, 213, 265 
Hawk, 61, 63, 69, 247, 263 


He, 17, 49, 66, 67, 91, 157,176,183, 
265, 281 

Head, 27,57-9, 66,167, 259, 273 
Heart of the Master, The (Crowlevl 
121 

Hecate, 15, 44, 57-9, 112, 148, 172 
173, 221,224, 265, 276, 282 
Hekau (see Ur-Hekau), 57, 59, 282 
Hekt, 148, 172, 173, 224, 239, 244, 
265, 282 

Hell, 11, 61, 67, 114, 133, 213, 220, 
250,278 
Hellfire, 60, 61 
Hemethterith, 183, 265 
Henning, W., 182 
Hermit, The (Atu IX), 209 
Herodotus, 118 
Hexagram, 98, 264 
Hibiscus, 252 

Hieratic Papyrus of Nesi Amsu, The 
(tr. Budge), 279 

Hierophant, The (Atu V), 186-9 
High Priestess, The (Atu H), 172, 190 
Hippopotamus, 182,189 
Hislop, Rev. A., 143, 288 
Hod, 18,145,147,150, 249, 265 
Hohgates, 90, 91 
Holub, Allen, xiv, 125 
Holy Ghost, 161, 167, 185, 274, 276 
Holy Guardian Angel, 88, 95, 121, 
213, 255, 257 

Holy Kabbalah, The (Waite), 42 
Homosexuality, 146,172 
Honey, 35 
Honeymoon, 35 

Hoor-paar-Kraat, 14, 48, 57, 69, 84 
87, 95, 96, 146, 200, 209, 265, 
266 

Hor-ApoUo, 63 

Horns, xiv, 1, 14, 61, 96, 111, 112, 
190, 229, 231, 235, 247, 264-6, 
268, 274,276 

Homs, Aeon of, 29, 69, 96, 97, 135, 
146,218,228,241,265, 266 
Hottentot, 85, 264 
Hriliu, 57, 59,122, 266 
Hrumachis, 69 
Hrumakhu, 94, 271 

Hyena, 61, 125, 126, 129, 135, 136, 
193, 196,260, 266, 282, 283 

IAO, 156,161,200 
Idagba, 203 


Index 


297 


Ife, 189,266 

I.H.V.H., 55,66, 91,96,176,265, 280 
He, 179,180, 266 

Images and Oracles of Austin Osman 
Spare (Grant), 17, 41, 88, 128, 
148-50, 214, 233, 255, 285, 287 
Immortality, 208, 209 
Incarceration, 254, 255 
Incense, Nuit’s, 118 
Incubus, 212 

Inspiration, Works of, 206 
Invisibility, 209, 250 
Ion, 67, 82 

IPSOS, 116, 119, 121, 122, 125, 266 
Ireland, Shadrack, 208 
Irem, 68, 69 

Isis, 27, 39, 77, 187, 189, 192, 197 
200, 203, 208, 265, 266, 273 
Isis Unveiled (Blavatsky), 27 
Iyemoja, 185,189, 266 

Jackal, 83,180,189,196 

Jagrat, 13, 25, 26, 37, 38, 43,45, 266 

Jehovah (see I.H.VJL), 55, 75, 280 

Jeremiah, 75 

Jonas, Hans, 288 

Jones, Charles Stansfeld (see Achad, 
Frater), 2 

Juggernaut, 44, 266 
Jump rhythm, 148 

Jupiter, 61,145, 211, 212 

Kabbalah Unveiled, The (tr. Mathers), 
144,186,270 

Kabultiloa (see Bultu), 193, 194, 266 
268 ' 
Kaf-Ape, 41, 49, 50, 52, 53, 58, 65 
67,101,267,281 
Kaf-ruti, 136 

Kalachakra, 103,113, 267 
Kalas, 10, 12-17, 20, 21, 25, 46, 55, 
60, 65, 74, 78,110,113,115, 120, 
121, 134, 135, 144,147,149,170, 
178, 185, 206, 220, 228, 229, 253, 
267, 274, 275, 280, 282 
Kali, 22,55, 67, 74, 77,103,113,117, 
126, 148,169,175,178, 217,267 
Kalpa, 27 

Kamakalavilasa (tr. Woodroffe), 110 
Kaph, 21,58,101,103, 267 
Karezza, 207, 209, 219, 225, 246, 
267, 279 
Karma, 132 


Karpuradistotra (tr. Woodroffe), 67, 
110,289 

Kartikeya, 184, 267 
Kaula Circle, 113, 268 
Kaulas, 126, 199 
Kelly, Sir Edward, 48, 79 
Kep, 101 

Kether, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 28, 24, 26, 29, 
32, 37, 40, 45,47, 86,93, 94,145, 
148, 151, 154, 156, 163, 228, 
255, 257, 268, 275, 284 
Khart (see Child), 146, 268 
Kheft, 83 

Khem, 16, 136, 137, 194, 208, 219, 
230,231,268 

Khephra, 20, 37, 203, 205, 206, 
221,243,258 
Khepr-ta, 168, 268 

Khepsh, 66, 69, 166, 268, 270, 282 
Khonsu (also Khunsu), 192, 195, 273 
Kia, 41,42, 45, 268, 285 
Knight, Sir Richard P., 36 
Koph (see Coph), 36, 65, 101, 261, 
265, 268, 276 
Koth, 181,182, 268, 271 
Kotha, 181,268 
Krishna, 128, 130,198 

Kronus, 101,110, 268 

Kronotypes, 110,174, 268 
Kuhn, Alvin B., 20, 63, 263, 288 
Kulamavatantra (tr. Woodroffe), 110 
Kundalini (see Fire Snake), 149, 163, 
263, 269 

Kurgasiax, 211, 269 

LA, 103,166, 216 
Lafcursiax, 213, 269 
Lalita (see Lilith), 179, 269, 270 
LAM, 125, 235,269 
Lamed, 20, 269, 270 
Langage, S3, 269 
Lavender, 157 
LAShTAL, 252 
Leadbeater, C.W., 208 
Lebanah,19 
Left Hand, 49, 50,101 
Left Hand Path, 52, 99, 136, 151, 
153, 275, 282 
Legba, 161, 230, 231,269 
Lemur, 170,171 
Lemures, 170 
Lemuria, 171 
Leng, 224 


298 


Nightside ofEder 


00,288 Lmth > 74 > 166, 177, 179, 186, 188, 

i-eo, 41, lzl, 203, 270 log ofiq 97n 977 

Leopani, 61, 247 Linga, 270 

Lew, Eliphas, 26, 27, 42, 243, 288 Lion, 101, 203, 270 275 280 
Leviathan, 217, 218, 233, 270, 280 LionU, 203 ’ 

Ltber III vel Jugorum (Crowley), 133 Lizard, 60, 282 
Liber VII vel Lapidis Lazuli (Crowley), Loco 200 

15,156,235,273 Long^Abigail, 208 

T Cae Ca ™ Hi * a ‘ L °*£* “ ^ 20, 63, 172, 

L ' b Zv\ X w\ In Trigrammaton ( Crow - Lovecraft, Howard P., 58,68, 89,127, 

Lib rJ X f\ tl Cardi * Cincti Serpente jgf ’ {ft S ITo 111’ III’ 
Xw" 1 ’ 4 *“ \ * "M* ‘»1. 195, 

CCJTJT (A£ »W L£G/S, “ vP * 

xii, 2, 9, 16, 28, 30, 34, 3. 

aws,si .- — 

218,241,244,251 ‘ Luri^W 29 

Liber CCXXXI vel Asar in Amenti r..~L~ n ™ 


td the New England 
Rothovius), 208 
it (Conover), 147 
u VI), 190, 191, 195, 


ass -asa*— - — 

218, 241,244,251 ' umZIS 

tber CCXXXI vel Asar in Amenti Lurker at the Threshold, The (Love- 
(Crowley), xu, 36, 144, 145, 152, craftand Deriedi) 69 81 240 
54, 163, 164, 171, 178, 183, 

iff* if?’ o?o’ 203, 209> 212 * LVX (*ee 1TOX), 24, 29,68, 270 
2^ 24^246 4 8 T 5 5 ^ ^ 205,’ 2 33, 234, 270 


125, 135,177, 214, 215, 266 


Ltb un < 9M [VVtl Samekh ( Crowle y), Maat, Aeon of, 96, 97, 116, 118 119 
LibfcCCCXVHKThe Vision and the 27l’ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

r 79 > 116 > 168 * 239 Maat, Cult of, 97, 101, 114 125 275 

CDLXXIV vel Death (Crowley), Machen, Arthur, 89, 127, 160,’288 

Liber DCCLXXVn (777/Crowley), Malk'al^&PhU^phS Commentaries 


117, 131, 152, 177, 183, 188, 197, 
221, 240 

Liber DCCLXXVtt (777 Revised - 


on the Book of the Law (Crowley), 
17, 20, 32, 48, 53, 66, 69, 120, 
168, 257 




matici (Crowley), 147, 241 
Liber Pennae Praenumbra (Cook, 
Straw), xiv, 101, 114, 116, 117, 
124,266,275,286 
Libido, 191,193, 195 
Libra, 20, 54, 214, 270 
Lila, 24 


15, 55, 61, 82,106,108,112,125, 
128, 133, 159, 170,184,189, 220, 
258, 269, 274, 287 
Magician, The (Atu II), 53 
Magick, 10, 55, 116, 147, 148, 151, 
158, 172, 203-5, 213, 222, 243, 
251,273, 274, 281,282 


Index 


299 


Magick (Crowley), 14, 57, 66, 110, 
133, 136, 151, 173,181,189, 220, 
223, 241, 252, 269, 276 
Magus, 10, 111, 162-4, 180, 197,209, 
261,263,271 

Magus of Power, The (Atu I), 165 
Mahakalpa, 31 
Mahapralaya, 27, 270 
Mahapurusa, 130, 271, 272 
Ma Ion, 122,241,242, 271 
Maithuna, 147, 249 
Ma Kheru, 10 

Mako, 42, 71, 207, 208, 243, 254, 
267, 271 

Malkunofat, 216, 271 
Malkuth, 3, 5, 7, 11, 23, 24, 26, 32, 
40, 45, 112, 145, 148, 149, 151, 

176,177, 249, 255, 271, 284 
Man, 65, 121,150,156,169,187,188 
Manamana, 250, 271 
Mangrove, 244 
Manipura Chakra, 150 
Mantra, 284 

Marassas (see Twins), 197, 240, 271 
Mariette, A.E., 86 

Mars, 55, 62, 72, 145, 169, 177, 
219, 235, 236, 238, 268, 274 
Mary, 57,116 

Masloth (see Chokmah), 271 
Massey, Gerald, 46, 47, 56-59, 61, 74, 
79, 80, 90, 93, 96, 99-101, 108, 
110-13, 118, 136, 137, 143, 144, 
161, 166, 192, 247, 259, 269, 288 
Materialism, 266 

Mathers, S.L. MacGregor, 15, 95, 124, 
130, 218, 270, 288 
Maut, 114,115,116,119 
Maya, 24 

Mehta, Vithaldas N., 288 
Mendes, 118 
Meni, 98 

Menstruation, 55, 59, 73, 77, 78, 80, 
84, 98, 99, 113, 170, 174, 187, 
192, 199, 217, 218, 220, 235, 239 
Meon, 79,145, 250, 271 
Mercury, 18, 53, 83, 145, 147, 149, 
150, 162,195, 248, 249, 265 
Merodach, 75 
Merti Goddesses, 221 
Mesopotamia, 69 
Metatron, 43,44, 271 
Mete, 57,259 
Mezla, 45, 53, 228, 280 


Mezla (Ed. Ayers and Siebert), 228, 
273,287,288 
Middle Pillar, 29,45,46 
Milk, 183 
Minotaure, 189 
Mirandola, Pico della, 42 
Mirroir Fantastique, 79, 83, 239, 243 
271 

Mo Ayon (see Dark Doctrine), 241-3. 
250, 264, 271 

Monastery of the Seven Rays, 4, 10, 
58, 64, 107, 191, 195, 208, 222, 
241,251,255 

Moon, 15, 45, 49, 59, 65, 66, 72, 87, 
101, 112, 121, 145, 147, 160, 
166, 168, 169, 187,191,192, 206, 
224, 230, 239, 243, 260, 267, 268, 
274,279 

Mother, The, xiii, 14, 16,56, 77,97-9, 
101, 109, 112, 120,135,169,172,’ 
178, 183, 212, 227, 236, 259, 
264, 265, 272, 284 

Mouth, 21, 22, 57, 58, 82, 115, 116, 
117, 119, 120-2, 135, 246, 275, 
276 

Mu, 121,122,125,129,136, 243, 271 
Mudra, 204, 272 

Muladhara Chakra, 33, 151, 269, 272 
Mummy, 37-9, 173, 190, 192, 208 
226,249 

Navak, 81, 85 
Nakaka, 60,117 

Narcissus, 133, 147, 150, 209, 272 
Nashimiron, 244, 272 
Natural Genesis, The (Massey), 46,47, 
57, 74, 96, 99,101,105,108,112,’ 
113,143,144,195,259 
Nechashiron, 227 
Necheshtheron, 222, 272 
Necromancy, 221, 223, 225, 282, 285 
Necronomicon, The, 68,147, 240 
Necrophilia, 221, 223, 225 
Negative Way, 63, 102, 103, 135 
Neither-Neither, 41, 42,45 
Nephilim (see Giants), 93, 101, 130, 
146,187,188, 235,272 
Nephthys, 178,192,227 
Neptune, 9, 37, 145, 180, 191, 197. 
226, 261,272 

Netzach, 18, 145, 147, 149, 150, 
272 

Neuburg, Victor B., 115 


300 


Nightside of Eden 


Neuter (see Neter, Nuter), 14, 246, 
247, 272 

New bis Lodge (O.T.O.), 2 

Nia, 36, 49, 65-7, 74, 92, 261, 276 

Niantid, 206, 219, 272 

Nile, 20,134, 231 

Nirvana, 7, 255, 272, 277 

Nivritti Marg, 127 

Noah’s Ark (see Nu), 108, 109, 113 
Nodens, 9, 272, 273 
Non-Being, 25-7,46-8, 50,52, 53,103, 
129, 142, 165, 177,192,195, 221, 
238, 244, 245, 249,250 
North, 44, 49, 84, 184, 221, 231, 277 
Nose, 158 
Noumenon, 40 

NOX (see LVX), 68,85,94, 273 
Nu, 85,98,99,104,107-9,114 
Nu-bis, 15, 27, 90, 116, 118, 123, 
137,149,178,273 

Nuit, 9,16, 30,49,60,94,109,114-6, 
118, 160, 171, 218, 236, 242, 264, 
273 
Nun, 18 

Nuter (or Neter), 14,102, 272 
Nyarlathotep, 158 

Ob, 35, 36, 147, 163, 180, 193, 195, 
196, 264, 273 
Obeah, 179,180 
Obsession, 132 
Ochosd, 174, 273 
Octinomos, 32, 39,56, 259, 273 
Od, 35, 36, 147, 163, 177, 180, 193, 
195, 264, 273 

Odudua, 179, 180, 185, 257, 273, 
283 

Odun, 231, 254, 274 

Of Isis and Osiris (Plutarch), 101, 195 

Ogboni, 179, 254, 274 

Ogoun, 238, 274 

Ojehun, 201 

Olla, 72 ( 

Om, 97,109\ 

Ombos, 71,166,274 
On the Kabbalah and its Symbolism 
(Scholem), 29,235 

Once (see Anansi), 174, 179, 180, 258 
One Star in Sight (Crowley), 57 ' 
Ongogo Ogo, 269 

Ophidian Current, 21, 32, 58, 60, 74, 
142, 204, 261, 273, 274,278, 280, 
282, 284 


Order of the Shadow, 195 
Ordo Templi Orientb (O.T.O.), xii, 
xiii, 32, 56, 71, 73, 123, 125,128, 
129, 133, 135, 147,148,167,185, 
188, 200, 203, 204, 212-4, 219, 
220, 221, 225, 230, 231, 233-5, 
240, 243, 246, 258, 259, 269, 
270, 272-4, 280, 288 
Oriens, 187,188 
Original Sin, 24 
Oro, 197 
Orunapadi, 250 
Orungan, 185, 274 
Osirians, 135, 218,222 
Osiris, xiii, xiv, 39, 192, 200, 231, 
245, 246 

O.T.O. (see Ordo Templi Orientb) 
Chd, 234 
Oyster, 178, 230 
Oz, 53 

Pan, 29, 71, 118, 158, 166, 188, 207, 
230, 243, 269,274,277 
Paradbe, 65, 270 
Parfaxitas, 205, 233, 274 
Paroketh (see Veil of Paroketh), 54, 
275 

Parthenogenesis, 209 
Pasht, 59 
Pasiphae, 189 
P«f, 21,22, 82, 275 
Peacock, 184, 227, 268,275 
Pentagram, 72, 96, 98, 159, 168, 183, 
220, 228, 264 

Per Vas Nefandum (PVN), 146, 246 

Petro, 194, 275 

Phallus of Set, 53,181 

Pig, 126,191,192,195, 261, 268 

Pineal Gland, 257 

Pipe (of Pan), 158 

Puces, 108,121 

Plansiphere (Denderah), 56,192 
Plutarch, 101,195 

Pluto, 5, 39, 40, 144, 145, 148, 151, 
191,211,212,249,255, 275 
Pole Star, 91 

Powers of Evil, The (Cavendish), 143 
Pralaya, 31,97,99,177 
Priapus, 230 
Produs, 85, 224 
Proserpine (Persephone), 36 
Psyche, 39 

Puberty, 94,171, 235, 236,271 


Index 


301 


Pylon of Daath, 25, 30, 37, 143, 180 
Pyramid, 86, 177, 180, 248, 249, 252 
Pyramids, City of the, 32, 34, 192, 
259-61,277 
Pyromancy, 248 
Pythagoras, 96,101 

Qpbbalah, The (Myer), 43 
Qadosh, 172 
Qatesh, 204, 275 
. Qesheth, 172,275 
t- Qlip hoth, 1, 29-31, 34, 52,63,84,89, 

-987104, 109, 113, 114, 116, 127, 

142, 144, 145, 149, 1£1-S, 166, 
194, 218, 240, 244,248, 263, 275, 
280 

Qoph, 58, 59, 65, 91, 92, 101, 121, 
122,173,224,265, 267, 276 
Qulidfi, 205, 239 

Rabelais, 94 
Radha, 128 
Raflifu, 245, 276 

Ra-Hoor-Khuit, 14, 42, 48, 55,69, 84, 
86, 87, 96, 169, 178, 183-5, 200, 
241, 242, 265, 276 

Rainbow (see Bow), 172, 203, 204, 
220, 221,227, 257,275 
Ramakrishna, Sri, 24, ISO 
Ramana Maharshi, Sri, 130 
Randolph, P.B., 39, 52,288 
Rangaswamy, M.A., 288 
Raven, 190 
Reality, 26, 28 

Records of the Past (Talbot), 108 
Reification, Works of, 206 
Religion & Philosophy of Tevaram, 
The (Rangaswamy), 129 
Rerit, 276 

Resh, 58, 59,65,101 
Restriction, 279 

Retromingency, 126, 136, 177, 283 
Revelation, 70,144, 218 
Reversion, 10, 250, 251, 255, 261, 
283 

Rimbaud, Arthur, 132 
Rohmer, Sax, 126,127, 288 
Rosencreutz, Christian, 227, 249 
Rothovius, Andrew, 208, 289 
RPSTOVAL, 119,120,121,276 
Ru, 57, 66, 275 

Ruach, 57, 158, 160, 167, 274, 276 
Ruhak, 57 


Sagittarius, 227,254 
Sahasrara Chakra, 150, 276 
Sai Baba, Sri (of Shirdi), 130 
Sakkarah, 112 
Saksaksalim, 226, 276 
Salem (New England), 208 
Salt, Pool of, 113 
Samadhi, 276, 277 

Samad, 29, 42, 43, 71, 166, 186, 
188, 207,243, 277 

Samedhi, Baron, 195, 196, 260, 277 
Samsaia, 7, 255, 272, 277 
Satan, 29, 40-2, 72, 74, 78, 103, 143, 
151, 157, 167, 181,188, 207, 243, 
244,277 

Saturn, 9, 29, 37, 73, 101, 145, 168, 
180, 195, 228, 236,240,251,254, 
258, 259, 269 

Scarlet Woman, 17, 35,43,45, 53, 71, 
72,80,84,113,129,177,182, 229, 
230,252,259,263,274,277,281 
Scholem, Gershom, 29, 30, 235, 289 
Scorpio,62,96,216,219,220,221,225 
Scorpion, 60, 61,180, 220, 278 
Seaton, Frederick, xiv 
Secret Chiefs, 130 

Secret Doctrine, The (Blavatsky), 27, 
79,191 

Secret-ion, 147, 148, 168, 177, 242 
Secret Life of Salvador Dali, The 
(Dali), 28 

Secret Wisdom of the Qpbalah, The 
(Fuller), 42, 66 
Sefekh, 70,166,229 
Sefer ha-Temunah, 30 
Sekhet, 35, 125, 134, 203, 221, 256, 
277 

Sekhet-Aahru, 35, 278 
Selwanga, 203 
Semen, 60, 216,243, 279 
Separate Reality, A (Castaneda), 150 
Sepher Sephiroth (Crowley and others), 
70 

Sepher Yetzirah, 217,270 
Sephiroth, 1,2,4,278 
Septuagint, 109 
Serau, 118, 278 
Serk, 62,180, 278 

Serpent, 18-20, 30, 35, 51, 54,60,62, 
63, 74, 81, 85, 101, 105, 115, 
125, 142, 144, 153,160,180,187, 
192, 200, 203, 204, 218,221,227, 
237, 269, 270,273-5, 280,284 



302 


Nightside of Edt 


Set, 14-16, 20, 29, 30, 32, 35, 37, 
40-2, 57, 69, 72, 78,101,103, 111, 
112, 115,118, 134,146,148,167, 
168, 178, 180, 184,187,189, 194, ' 
200, 203, 207, 208, 211, 228-31 
241, 243, 245, 249, 254, 258, 259, 
262, 264, 265, 268, 271-4, 276-9, 
281,284 

Set, Desert of, 8, 15, 25, 26, 32, 37 
43,192,249,264 
Set, Sigil of, 140, 258 
Sevekh, 55, 56, 71,184, 254, 274 
Seven, 18, 55, 56, 71, 102, 166, 184, 
247, 272, 278, 284 
Sex, 17, 282 

Sexual magick (schematized), 205, 206 
Shadow-woman, 18l 
Shaitan, 9, 29, 30, 32, 119, 126, 143, 
184, 227, 235, 245, 258, 273, 275, 
278, 279, 284 

Shaitan Aiwass, 87,180, 231 
Shalchbiron, 204, 279 
Shaficu.,248, 279 

Shamhallah (see Ville-aux-Champs), 

Shan Han, 63 
Shekinah, 42, 279 
Shichiririon, 198, 279 
T Sh “. 30, 31, 35, 59, 143, 167, 226. 
248,273,279 
v SMpi The (Crowley), 97 
Vshiva.47, 216 
' Shoggoths, 159 

Shu (see Eshu), 35, 270, 279 
Shugal, 41, 43, 46, 69, 103, 133,146, 
150, 168, 180, 195, 196, 261, 279 
Shus-cn-Har, 112 

Silence, 18, 48, 125, 145, 146, 163 
176,209, 217, 235,265 
Silver Star, 36,117,199, 264 
Silver Star, Order of the (A,'. A.'.), 

15, 224, 256 

Sin (see Shin), 59,174, 273, 279 
Sirius (see Sothis), 14, 16, 35, 40 
74, 90, 224, 256, 262, 280 
Sirius Mystery, The (Temple), 41, 52, 
72,106, 224, 251,262 
Six, 17, 282 
Skeat, Rev. W.W., 146 
Sk ^ng,217 

SleepTMajpcal (see Trance), 171, 279, 


Smith, David, xiv 
Sodom, 212 
Sodomy, 113, 146, 231 
Solomon, xiii 

Son, 37, 61, 68, 96, 101, 177, 184, 
241,250, 264,278, 281,282 
Sorcery, 147, 255, 276 
Sothis, 15, 16, 40, 41, 106, 113, 172, 
184, 187, 224, 231, 246, 249, 256, 
278, 279,280 

Sothis (Ed. Bailey, Hall, Magee), xiv, 
10,51,289 

Sound Scale (Tonal), 152 
South, 49, 221,231,277 
Sovereign Sanctuary (O.T.O.), 204 
Sow, 111, 177-9, 269 
Space, 87,88,116, 242 
Spare, Austin Osman, 10, 29, 41, 88 
114, 123, 127-9, 131-3, 142, 147! 
153, 214, 233, 243, 258, 277, 285, 
289 

Span-ow, 177 

Spectral Hyena, Cult of the, 193,196, 
260, 264,266 

Spermatozoon, 20, 21, 101, 201, 204 
206,211,280,284 
Sphinx, 212, 255 

Spider, 126, 179, 180, 215, 273, 274 

Spiral, 125, 238 

Spirit, 251, 252, 257 

Srividya, 135, 136, 280 

Star, The (Atu XVII), 183, 184, 229 

Star Sponge Vision, 90 

Stele of Revealing, 72, 108, 169, 284 

Stirling, William, 289 

Stork, 169 

Straw, Gary, xiv, 266,286 
Studies in the Tantras (Bagchi), 126 
Sulphur, 184 
Sumer, 69, 126,135 
Sun, 37, 59, 61, 66, 68, 87, 96, 101, 
121, 145, 168, 199, 205, 206, 213, 
220, 225, 231, 243, 258, 259,263, 
264, 270, 274, 278, 281 
Sunset, 67, 73,190, 229, 230,281 
Sunyavada, 100 
Superspace, 90 
Surrealists, 124,132 
Sushupti, 25, 26,37,43,45, 280 
Svadisthana Chakra, 150, 280 
Svapna, 13, 25, 26, 37,38,43,45,280 
Swastika, 14, 61, 108, 154, 156, 238, 
258 


Index 


303 


Swing (see Trapeze), 128 
Sword, 18, 31, 55, 56, 68, 70, 73, 94 
101, 103, 108, 109,146,169, 179* 
180, 214, 235, 236, 271, 283, 284 
Sword of Wisdom (Colquhoun), 124, 
128 

Sylphs, 159 

Symonds, John, xiv, 287 


Tanith, 233, 280, 283 
Tanith, Soror (Ayers, Janice). 47 
125,269 

Tantras, 7, 13, 100, 109, 134, 136, 
222, 267, 275 

Tao of Physics, The (Capra), 111 
Taoism, 100 

Tarot, 12, 20, 31, 48, 59, 91, 107 
115,145,185,213,280 
Tau, 245, 253 
Taurt, 91,194 
Taurus, 189 
Taylor, John, 148, 289 
Tefnut, 35, 279 
Teitan (see Shaitan), 143,144 
Temphioth, 202, 205, 280 
Templars, Knights, 27, 42, 57, 113 
207, 259, 263, 273 
Temple, Robert, 224, 289 
Terminus, 254 
Teth, 20, 54,121, 202, 280 
Tetragrammaton, 36, 265, 280, 281 
Thantifaxath, 253 

Thelema, xii, 70, 179, 245, 281, 284 
Theli, 217, 270, 281 
Third Eye, 257 
Thirteen, 15,117 

Thoth, 10, 41, 49, 65, 118, 163, 166 
182, 267, 281 
Tiamat, 56 
Timaeus, 85 

Time, 55, 70, 73, 74, 83, 87, 88,102, 

103,110,113,114,116,117.169, 
174,220, 267, 268 

Tiphereth, 10, 17, 32, 45, 53, 59, 87 
121, 133, 134, 145,147,149,15oi 
184,199, 200, 220, 281 
Tiriel, 162 
Togo, 174 
Tohu, 104 
Tongue, 204, 205 
Tophet, 44,47,105 
Torah, The, 30, 213,214 


Tower, 119-22, 124, 134, 146, 149 
181,228, 235,243,275 
Tower (Post Office), 124 
Tower, The (Atu XVI), 94, 120, 228 
Trance, 171, 204, 205, 275 
Trapeze, 128 

Transcendental Magic (Ldvi), 26 
Tree of Death, 281 

Trident, 9, 246, 248, 261, 273, 279 
Trinity, 112 
Trivia (Hecate), 148 
True Will, 240, 241, 245, 278, 281 
Tuat, 25,83, 281 
Tuesday, 55 
Turiya, 25, 43, 45, 281 
Twins, 55, 56, 111,112, 193,197,217 
240, 246, 264, 271, 279, 280, 284 
Two Babylons, The (Hislop), 143 
Typhon, 16, 35, 44, 56, 61, 71, 101 
104, 112, 135, 166,167,169,187, 
189, 207, 212, 221, 243, 246, 251, 
265,271,279,281,282 
Tzaddi, 117 
Tzalalimiron, 193, 282 
Tzaphiriron, 209, 282 
Tzuflifu, 237, 282 
UFOs, 75 

Unspeakable Confessions of Salvador 
Dali The (Dali), 132 
Upadhi, 282 

Uranus, 9,145,150,237,238,242,282 

Ur-Hekau, 44, 57, 59, 71, 173, 224 
229, 282 
Uriens, 186, 282 
Urine, 112,113 

Ursa Major, 18, 41, 70,101, 184,186 
268 
Ut, 154 
Vahana, 282 

Vamachara (Vamamarg; see Left Hand 
Path), 109, 117, 131, 135, 136, 
199,282 

Vampire, 198, 269 
Vampire Bat, 117, 127 
Vampire Vortex, 223, 282 
Vau, 17, 281, 282 

Veil of Paroketh, 19, 53, 54,122, 275 
Veil of the Abyss, 15, 16, 53, 54, 66, 

68, 94, 99,103,105,150,249 
Venus, 15, 18, 71, 96, 102, 145, 147 
149, 176, 177, 184,211,247, 262, 
269, 270, 272 


304 


Nightside of Eden 


Vertigo, Creative, 128,129,131 
V«sh, 80, 82 

Vever, 194,197, 240, 283 
Via Negationis, 102,103 
Ville-aux-Champs, 194, 283 
Vinum Sabbati, 121, 230, 231 
Viparita Karani, 19, 33, 117, 221, 283 
Viparita Maithuna, 127, 136, 28S 
Virgin, 15, 19, 36, 77, 169-72, 177, 
178, 183, 207, 223, 227, 238, 283 
Virgo, 207 

Visuddha Chakra, 10, 33, 48, 58, 147, 
150, 283 

Void, 24, 28, 40, 65, 100, 121, 148, 
154,164, 257 

Voltigeurs, 90, 148, 173, 197, 224, 
240, 244, 283 

Voodoo, 127, 148, 194-7, 204, 222, 
223,240,261,269,275 
Vulcan, 249 

Vulture, 114-7, 120, 121, 122, 125, 
126,129,135, 271 


Waite, A.E., 43,44,141, 289 
Wand, Magic, 146, 173, 179, 180,235 
Wanga, 179, 283 
Water, 116,117 
Wealth, 217, 231, 247 
Wei Wu Wei (Gray, Terence), 63, 130, 
245, 289 
Werewolves, 235 
West, 85, 229, 281 
Wheel, 212, 213, 260, 267 
Wheel of Fortune, 212 
White People, The (Machen), 160 
Whore, 170,176, 178,179,183 
Wife, 170 

Wilkinson, Louis, 133 
Williams, Charles, 127 
Witchcraft, 121-3, 127, 128,168,172, 
203, 208, 223, 230, 231, 232, 274 
Witches, 57-9, 78, 79, 122, 164, 223 
225, 239 
Wolf, 220, 234 


Woman, 17, 20, 49, 54, 65, 135, 136, 
148, 150, 151, 169,176,180, 202, 
217, 218, 221, 227, 251, 263,265, 
270, 275, 282, 283 

Woodroffe, Sir John (Avalon, Arthur), 
110, 136,289 
Wryneck, 125, 126 
X, 56 

Yamatu, 207 
Yantra, 283 
Yeats, W.B., 124 

Yesod, 25, 26, 32, 33, 45, 54, 55, 59, 
71, 83, 112, 113, 115, 121, 145, 
147, 148, 151, 168, 169,230,231, 
241, 242, 243, 255, 263, 273, 284 
Yetzirah, 43, 54, 284 
Yezid, 284 

Yezidi, 32, 72, 143, 168, 184, 228, 
273, 275, 278, 284 
Yihoveaum (Spare, A.O.), 133 
YiKing, 212 

Yod, 20, 21, 66, 71, 91, 101, 167, 

186, 209, 214, 281,284 
Yog-Nuit (see Juggernaut), 266 
Yog-Sothoth, 44,159,193, 284 
Yom Kipour, 103 

Yoni, 18, 56, 57, 59, 67, 99, 180, 

187, 216, 257 

Zain, 18, 31, 55-7, 84, 103, 108, 109, 
271,283,284 

Zain, Aeon of, 18, 28, 31, 33,146 
Zamradiel, 190, 285 
Zangbeto, 254 

Zarathustra (see Zoroaster), 80 
Zebulah, 95 
ZendAvesta, 52 
Zivo (see Aiwass), 69,82 
Zodiac, 56, 186,188,264 
Zombeism, 206, 221-5, 285 

Zos, 41,149,150, 285 
Zos Kia Cultus, 17, 128, 129, 150, 
221,262,268,285 


